# Aggregation-Induced Emission: New Vistas at the Aggregate Level

## Abstract

Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) describes a photophysical phenomenon in which molecular aggregates exhibit stronger emission than the single molecules. Over the course of the last 20 years, AIE research has made great strides in material development, mechanistic study and high-tech applications. The achievements of AIE research demonstrate that molecular aggregates show many properties and functions that are absent in molecular species. In this review, we summarize the advances in the field of AIE and its related areas. We specifically focus on the new properties of materials attained by molecular aggregates beyond the microscopic molecular level. We hope this review will inspire more research into molecular ensembles at and beyond the meso level and lead to the significant progress in material and biological science.

## 1. Introduction

Throughout the history of scientific exploration by humanity, a commonly accepted research philosophy is to observe the phenomenon and summarize the rules from the macroscale, then go to study the mechanism at the microscale, and finally reach a complete understanding.[1] This kind of research philosophy dominates research in physics, chemistry, biology, and material science, and has made great contributions to the advancement of modern natural science.[2] The study of luminescence and luminescent materials also obeys this philosophy and can be traced back to 16th century when a Spanish physician called Nicolas Monardes first reported that an infusion of a Mexican wood with blue emission could be used to treat kidney and urinary diseases.[3] This identification of an effective drug through its emission color can be considered as the first application of fluorescence. The most famous luminescent material in ancient reports is the so-called “Bologna stone” discovered by Vincenzo Cascariolo in 1602, which attracted the attention of Galileo Galilei.[4a] As he commented “It must be explained how it happens that the light is conceived into the stone, and is given back after some time, as in childbirth”. Another representative luminescent matter is named “Durham fluor” discovered by Edward D. Clarke in Cambridge in 1819, the crystal of which was perfectly transparent and showed dichroic behavior: the color displayed by reflected light was deep sapphire blue, whereas that displayed by transmitted light was intense emerald green.[4b] Generally speaking, before the beginning of 19th century, many scientists observed the magic luminescent phenomenon and great scientists such as Galileo, Boyle, Newton and Stokes all tried to explain it. Unfortunately, due to the limited understanding in photophysics, the luminescence phenomenon was not well understood at that time.[3c]

After over three centuries of continuous research on luminescence phenomena and luminescent materials, especially at the molecular level, gradually a deeper understanding of the mechanism of luminescence has been achieved and researchers have come to realize that the light of luminescent materials arises from the deactivation of the excited states of the luminescent molecules that absorb light energy.[5] Based on this understanding, great achievements have been made in this area and one of the biggest achievements was the demonstration of the Jablonski diagram in 1933.[6] From the Jablonski diagram, one can visualize the possible processes that a light-irradiated molecule undergoes, including photon absorption, vibrational relaxation, internal conversion, fluorescence, intersystem crossing (ISC), phosphorescence and delayed fluorescence. This description of luminescence at the molecular level greatly enhanced people's understanding of this phenomenon and provided a guide for the development luminescence science.

The research of molecular luminescence suggests that a single molecule is the basic unit for the occurrence of luminescence, while the structure of the molecule determines its luminescence properties. By further extension of this idea, one may easily conclude that the properties of microscopic molecules should be also present in their macroscopic materials. Indeed, this idea works well in many cases. For example, a glucose molecule is sweet and its aggregate is also sweet. Similarly, a single polymeric polyethylene molecule is insulating as is its macroscopic form, that is, polyethylene plastic. This philosophy and approach of molecular science guides the design of luminescent materials and many other functional materials. And under the guidance of this principle, the rational design of molecular structures and the elucidation of the structure–property relationships have become the key questions of material science. However, does material performance mainly depend on the molecular structure? Is it possible that the properties of materials or molecular aggregates will be different from that of single molecules? The answer is definitely yes. Indeed, an inconsistency between molecular behavior and material performance has been observed in luminescent materials. For instance, traditional luminophores with planar and strong intermolecular interactions generally show bright emission in the mono-dispersed state but weakened or even quenched emission in the aggregated state. This phenomenon is known as aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ).[7] More interestingly, some propeller-shaped molecules show no emission in their dilute solutions (single molecular state) but much enhanced emission in their molecular ensembles. This effect is known as aggregation-induced emission (AIE). These results indicate that molecular ensembles can show totally different properties from isolated molecules. In material science, this means that it is also worthwhile paying attention to what happens in the aggregated state as well to caring about the characteristics of the single molecules. Unfortunately, few people have systematically studied molecular ensembles at or beyond the meso scale although it is still an unexplored land offering huge opportunities.

In this regard, AIE research provides an excellent platform to explore the behavior of molecular aggregates since it emphasizes the new properties achieved by molecular aggregates beyond the microscopic molecular level.[9] During the last 20 years, AIE research has made great advances in material development, mechanistic study, and high-tech applications. These achievements demonstrate that many behaviors and functions that are absent in molecular species can be found in molecular aggregates. Additionally, since the properties of molecular ensembles are closer to those of macroscopic materials, AIE research is thus of both scientific value and technological importance for real applications.

In this review, we summarize the key breakthroughs of AIE research, focusing mainly on the new branches that have developed. In particular, we present the new properties that molecular ensembles bring to molecules and highlight the role of molecular aggregates in improving the performance of organic functional materials. The branches of AIE include crystallization-induced emission (CIE),[10a] room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP),[10b] aggregation-induced delayed fluorescence (AIDF),[10c] anti-Kasha transition (AKT),[10d] clusterization-triggered emission (CTE),[9e] through-space interaction (TSI),[10e] mechanoluminescence (ML),[10f] circularly polarized luminescence (CPL),[10g] aggregation-induced generation of reactive oxygen species (AIG-ROS),[10h] photothermal/photoacoustic (PT/PA),[10i] and solid-state molecular motion (SSMM).[10i,j] In addition, some of the latest advancements of AIE research will also be introduced in the Supporting Information. We hope this review will offer valuable insight and can also inspire research into molecular ensembles at/beyond the meso-scale level that leads to significant progress in material and biological science.

## 2. AIE and the Research Branches

### 2.1. Aggregation-Induced Emission (AIE)

AIE describes the behavior of a molecule which shows dim or no emission in dilute solution but much enhanced emission in aggregates or in the solid state.[8] To some extent, the phenomenon of AIE is not new: Sir George Gabriel Stokes had described a similar phenomenon in 1853 when he studied the luminescent properties of some inorganic salts.[11] However, little attention was paid to the significance of the observations and the potential of this kind of materials for practical applications until 2001, when Tang and co-workers investigated the luminescence behavior of rotor-rich methyl-pentaphenylsilole, they re-discovered this phenomenon and proposed the concept of AIE.[8] After the systematic investigation of the AIE phenomenon of different AIE systems, in 2003, they realized that the active intramolecular motion of AIE luminogens (AIEgens) in the excited state possibly accelerates the non-radiative decay of the excitons to quench their emission in the solution state. Such an intramolecular rotation is restricted in the aggregated state and this leads to a reduction of the non-radiative decay and an enhancement of the luminescence.[12] They thus proposed the restriction of intramolecular rotation (RIR) as the mechanism of AIE. To rationally explain some new AIE systems without rotors, they further proposed the restriction of intramolecular vibration (RIV) as a supplementary of RIR since intramolecular vibration can also result in non-radiative decay.[13] Overall, RIR and RIV were combined under the new term restriction of intramolecular motion (RIM). The RIM mechanism now has been widely accepted as the mechanism of AIE and can be simply described as follows: In solution or in the mono-dispersed state, the active intramolecular motion (including rotation and vibration) boosts the non-radiative decay channels like conical intersections or dark decay processes to quench the emission, while in the aggregated state, the non-radiative decay channels are blocked due to the restriction of the intramolecular motion, leading to enhanced emission.[14] Following the RIM mechanism, any manipulation that can restrict the intramolecular motion of AIEgens theoretically can lead to a stronger emission.[15] The unique intramolecular motion-responsive luminescence of AIEgens and their strong solid-state emission enable their extensive applications in various fields including fluorescent imaging, bio-probes, chemical sensors, photonic drugs, and optoelectronics.[9] Moreover, aggregated molecular ensembles can even display some new properties and functions that are not found in their molecular species. This thus opens new doors for the development of luminescent materials and even the whole area of material science.

### 2.2. Crystallization-Induced Emission (CIE)

Organic luminogens with strong solid-state emission are important since many advanced optoelectronic devices such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), organic light-emitting transistors (OLETs), and organic lasers work in the form of thin films or crystals.[16] Moreover, crystallization is beneficial for charge transport of organic semiconducting emitters and is thus favorable for producing OLETs and organic lasers.[16b,c] However, for traditional luminogens, crystallization is notorious because the strong p–p interactions in crystals usually shift the emission wavelength and lead to a weakening of the emission intensity.[17] Therefore, various chemical modification and physical doping strategies have been employed to avoid luminogenic crystallization. However, these in turn, lead to an increase in the cost and complexity of the devices.[18] During our study of AIE phenomena, we observed that some molecules showed no emission in both solution and the amorphous solid state but bright emission in their crystal state. We named this phenomenon crystallization-induced emission (CIE).[10a] Further investigations revealed that in crystals of CIE molecules, there are very few strong p–p interactions but numerous other kinds of intermolecular interactions such as hydrogen bonding, C–H···p interactions, or heteroatom–heteroatom interactions. These interactions not only help rigidify the molecular conformations but also avoid the emission quenching through p–p interactions.[10a, 17, 19] Furthermore, unlike traditional ACQ molecules that usually show red-shifted emission and weakened emission in the crystal state, CIE molecules generally show blue-shifted emission and enhanced emission in their crystal form. Such features potentially enable the luminogens to show both strong emission and high charge mobility.[19, 20] Theoretical calculations provided explanations for the CIE effect.[17a] Molecules with twisted and bulky structures are packed loosely in the amorphous state, which enables them to undergo some sort of intramolecular motion. Consequently, there is an energetically available conical intersection (CI) or excited-state minimum with a small band gap which leads to a red-shift and a weakening of the emission.[14b,c] However, in the crystal form, due to conformational rigidification, the CI and excited-state minimum are not accessible energetically. The reduction of non-radiative decay thus leads to stronger emission in the blue-shifted region of the spectrum. The CIE phenomenon suggests that even in the amorphous solid state, active intramolecular motion still possibly exists and influences the photophysical properties of luminogens. Crystallization, on the other hand, can work as a powerful strategy to restrict the excited-state intramolecular motion and suppress the non-radiative decay of luminogens.

### 2.3. Room-Temperature Phosphorescence (RTP)

Organic luminogens with room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP) have attracted great attention as their relatively long-lived triplet excited states have found useful applications such as emergency lighting, traffic signs, interior decoration, anti-counterfeiting, and high-sensitive bioimaging.[21] The main photophysical process of RTP involves an efficient singlet–triplet intersystem crossing (ISC) to generate a stable triplet exciton and its subsequent competitive radiative decay to emit phosphorescence.[21a,b] However, compared with inorganic and organometallic phosphorescent compounds, the weak spin orbital coupling (SOC) of most organic luminogens leads to their inefficient ISC and much slower radiative decay of the triplet exciton. Therefore, the realization of pure organic RTP luminogens is extremely challenging. Through a comprehensive understanding of the phosphorescence mechanism, many effective design principles and strategies have been proposed in the last few decades to develop materials with persistent and stable RTP. Representative examples include halogen bonding,[22a,b] H-aggregation,[22c,d] and n–p transition[22e] to promote ISC and simultaneously mitigate the non-radiative decay of the triplet exciton. On the other hand, although heavy atoms and n–p transitions can enhance spin orbit coupling (SOC) of organic compounds to facilitate the ISC process, whether these effects can promote a phosphorescence enhancement in the solution state is not predictable due to the relatively active non-radiative decay. However, in the solid state, those mentioned strategies generally make a valuable contribution to the improvement of the observed photophysical behavior. Tang and co-workers reported the RTP of pure organic halogenated benzophenone (BP) derivatives.[10b] The heavy atoms and lone-pair of electrons of aromatic carbonyl compounds favor SOC, which allows the intrinsic triplet exciton generation through ISC. However, all the BP derivatives are not luminescent in solution at room temperature but highly phosphorescent at 77 K and in the crystal state. Further investigation reveals that the numerous C–H···O and C=O···Br–C intermolecular interactions together with heavy atoms and n–p transitions help rigidify the conformation and achieve more efficient spin-orbit coupling to enable bright phosphorescence. Several studies on the solid-state RTP of halogenated or carbonyl-containing organic molecules have also emphasized the role of structure rigidification by crystallization.[10b, 21, 22] Based on these findings, Tang and co-workers proposed that crystallization can stabilize the triplet exciton and prevent it from being quenched by oxygen. At the same time it can suppress non-radiative decay of the triplet exciton to induce prominent phosphorescence.[10b] This crystallization-induced phosphorescence (CIP) is also applicable to many other systems and widely used to afford RTP materials. Basically, CIP enables the simple design of RTP molecules because non-radiative decay could be effectively blocked by crystallization-induced conformational rigidification. In this way, the ISC processes can be better regulated. For example, by combining the El-Sayed rule and a CIP effect, Tang et al. rationally prepared some benzophenone derivatives whose excited states show hybrid (n,π*) and (π,π*) configurations to mitigate the conflict of RTP efficiency and lifetime.[22e] These BP derivatives exhibit RTP with both high efficiency and long lifetime in the crystal state. One of molecules, BDBF, achieves an RTP efficiency of 34.5% and a lifetime of 230 ms. These studies suggest that for pure molecular systems, the key factors to achieve long-lived and bright RTP lie in the enhancement of the ISC process coupled with the effective suppression of non-radiative deactivation pathways of the triplet state.[21a] These two factors are compatible with each other in the aggregated state especially in the crystal state.

Although great advances have been made for single-component pure organic RTP systems, especially in terms of understanding the underlying mechanism of the RTP process, the performances of these RTP systems with regards to efficiency and lifetime need to be improved further. To help achieve this, the construction of non-single component RTP systems provides a more convenient and efficient pathway to develop pure organic RTP systems. These strategies include co-crystallization,[23a,b] rigid matrix host–guest systems,[23c,d] structurally modified host–guest systems,[23e] and dopant-based systems,[23f–h] which are intrinsically based on the integration and regulation of factors like suppression of the non-radiative deactivation pathways, stabilization of the triplet exciton and/or ISC enhancement. Among these non-single component RTP systems, one of the most exciting breakthroughs is the dopant-based system that basically utilizes the concept of inorganic afterglow and shows great advantages in affording organic RTP materials with ultralong lifetimes.[23f–h] Tang and co-workers have doped crystals of quaternary phosphonium bromide salts called TPP-3C2B with N,N-dimethylaniline (DMA), affording an ultralong afterglow of up to 7 h. In the doped system, DMA works as a dopant which works with the acceptor TPP-3C2B together to form an excitation unit denoted as a cluster exciton.[23g,h] The generation of ultralong RTP mainly proceeds in three steps: 1) the excitation/charge transfer, 2) the charge hopping and 3) the charge recombination/emission. The excitation occurs by exciting an electron from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor to complete the charge transfer. Charge hopping then happens in the LUMO of the acceptor, resulting in charge separation and exciton stabilization. Afterwards, charge recombination proceeds from the LUMO of the acceptor to the HOMO of the donor to lead to ultralong light emission. The solid environment of the dopant protects the photo-generated charges or radicals from quenching by atmospheric oxygen and suppresses non-radiative deactivation pathways to allow for such long afterglow.

### 2.4. Aggregation-Induced Delayed Fluorescence (AIDF)

At the aggregate level, the regulation of fluorescence and phosphorescence can be achieved through suppression of non-radiative decay and tuning of the ISC process. In addition, it is also possible to utilize both singlet and triplet excitons to realize delayed fluorescence by promoting reversed intersystem crossing.[24] Organic luminogens with delayed fluorescence (DF) have aroused great interest owing to their high exciton utilization and low cost.[25] Adachi and co-workers made a breakthrough in thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) by clarifying the molecular design of TADF molecules to effectively improve the utilization efficiency of excitons in OLEDs.[26] In spite of the high device efficiency of TADF emitters, however, like phosphorescent materials, almost all TADF emitters have to be dispersed into host matrices to suppress the concentration quenching effect and/or exciton annihilation. Consequently, a precisely controlled doping process is generally required to afford efficient OLEDs based on TADF emitters. Moreover, many doped OLEDs still exhibit severe roll-off in electroluminescence (EL) efficiency at high luminance, which becomes a difficult obstacle to achieving device stability and practical applications.[10c, 27]

AIEgens generally show twisted structures, strong emission and weak intermolecular p–p interactions in the aggregated state. Therefore, neat films of AIEgens are suitable for fabricating non-doped OLED devices since they can alleviate emission quenching and exciton annihilation. It is thus reasonable to integrate AIE and delayed fluorescence to produce emitters that inherit the advantages of both AIE and delayed fluorescence. In 2016, Tang and co-workers reported twisted donor–acceptor structures that showed both AIE behavior and delayed fluorescence thereby opening the window for AIEgens to approach delayed fluorescence.[28] Almost at the same time, Yasuda and co-workers reported carborane derivatives with AIDF and high quantum efficiency of up to 97% in the aggregated state. Non-doped OLEDs based on these o-carborane derivatives exhibited maximum external electroluminescence quantum efficiency of as high as 11%, confirming the great potential of AIDF molecules.[10c] Recently, Yang and co-workers explored the relationships between the aggregated state and TADF through crystal engineering. They showed that aggregation regulation is an important tool to tune the emission wavelength, lifetime, and efficiency of TADF emitters.[29] Tang and co-workers systematically investigated the benzophenone-based AIDF system, including the mechanism, structure–property relationship and device performance. As shown in Figure 9a, a molecule called CP-BP-PXZ shows typical AIE characteristics with a low quantum yield (QY) of 2.2% in solution but a QY of 58.0% in the neat film. Non-doped OLEDs based on CP-BP-PXZ show excellent EL efficiencies of 59.1 cd A@1, 65.7 lm W@1, and 18.4%, and an negligible current efficiency roll-off of 1.2% at 1 000 cd m@2. Moreover, the external quantum efficiency of the non-doped devices is even comparable to the doped ones (20.4%, 10 wt%). These results suggest that AIDF molecules are ideal candidates for fabricating non-doped OLED devices with EL efficiencies comparable with those of doped ones but with much lower or negligible roll-off.[30a] The superior device performance of neat films of AIDF molecules was attributed to the greatly suppressed emission quenching and exciton annihilation due to their intrinsically twisted molecular structures and unique packing modes.[30a] Tang et al. also discovered that neat films of some AIDF molecules show even better performance than that of doped films at a luminance of over 400 cd m@2. Such a feature is an advantage for real applications since the roll-off at high luminescence has been a big obstacle of OLED applications (Figure 9b).[30b] Therefore, non-doped OLED devices based on AIDF molecules offer the advantages of low cost, simple device fabrication techniques, and better reproducibility, and could thus potentially represent an important step towards the commercialization of OLEDs.

### 2.5. Anti-Kasha Transition (AKT)

Photoluminescence of most reported molecular systems generally originate from the radiative decay of the lowest excited state of a given multiplicity (S1 and T1). This has been referred to as Kasha’s rule and is a ubiquitously accepted fundamental principle in photophysics.[31] Yet few examples have demonstrated emission from higher excited states. Such cases can be regarded as anti-Kasha transitions. Research on anti-Kasha transitions not only enriches the understanding of fundamental photophysics but also inspires new design principles for optical functional materials, as the radiative decay is now not limited to the lowest excited state.

Unfortunately, examples of anti-Kasha transitions are still far less common than those obeying Kasha’s rule due to the unclear molecular design.[31] On the other hand, the reported systems with anti-Kasha transitions such as azulenes, acenes, and polyenes are synthesized following traditional molecular design and display mainly planar conjugated structures.[31b,c, 32a–c] Consequently, although these compounds exhibit anti-Kasha luminescence behavior in the solution state, what happens in aggregates and the solid state is still ambiguous because their emission is mostly quenched in aggregates. Additionally, as the aggregation process possibly influences the energy split and molecular conformation,[33] whether or not some unconventional systems without anti-Kasha behavior in solution will exhibit anti-Kasha transitions in the aggregated state remains unknown. In this case, luminogens with AIE characteristics possibly provide new opportunities for the development of anti-Kasha transitions.[10d, 32d] Moreover, because the aggregation process possibly influences the excited state characteristics such as the twisted intramolecular charge transfer, energy split, intramolecular motion, and exciton decay pathway,[33] it is thus possible to tune or switch the higher and lower excited state emission by regulating the aggregate process. Aprahamian and co-workers reported a series of BF2-hydrazine-based AIEgens with anti-Kasha emissions.[10d] Time-dependent density functional theory calculations and experimental results reveal that the S1 state is an approachable dark state in the solution state to quench the emission in dilute solution. However, in aggregates or a highly viscous environment, the internal conversion to the dark S1 state is suppressed by restricting the rotor rotation. The radiative decay of the S3 state thus occurs to give an enhanced emission. Aprahamian and co-workers proposed that suppression of Kasha’s rule is the photophysical mechanism responsible for the emission of BF2-hydrazine-based AIEgens in both viscous solution and the solid state.[10d]

Tang and co-workers reported an AIDF molecule called DMF-BP-PXZ with an efficient S2 emission. Similarly, the S1 state is a dark state. In the solution state, the rapid internal conversion allows S2 to relax to S0 through an S1 intermediate state, resulting in quenched emission. In contrast, in the solid state, the rate of internal conversion (KIC) was greatly suppressed. This leads to a direct relaxation from S2 to S0 to generate bright luminescence. More interestingly, non-doped and doped OLEDs with DMF-BP-PXZ as active layers all exhibit excellent EL efficiencies and extremely small efficiency roll-off. This work possibly opens an avenue for the utilization of high-energy electronic excited states for light emission.[34a] Besides the high excited-state relaxation from the singlet state, Tang et al. also achieved the high excited state emission from the triplet state. His group found that the BP derivative Cl-BDBT with hybrid (n,π*) and (π,π*) configurations shows both efficient light emission and long lifetimes, demonstrating an effective strategy to afford RTP materials.[22e] The T2 emission occurs through the thermal population from the low T1 state since the energy gap between T1 and T2 is very small. As a result, dual T1 and T2 emission generates white light from a single molecule.[34b] Recently, Liu and co-workers reported a rhodamine B-naphthalimide-based AIEgen. Interestingly, the monomers of RhB-Naph were non-emissive due to the presence of a dark S1 state. Upon aggregation, the intermolecular interactions significantly altered the electronic properties of RhB-Naph, resulting in bright emission from the S2 state.[33c] At the aggregate level, new luminogens with anti-Kasha emissions are being continuously discovered, which not only enriches the anti-Kasha family but also promotes the real application of luminogens with anti-Kasha emissions. More importantly, the aggregation-induced/switched anti-Kasha transition provides a viewpoint to understand some stimuli-responsive luminescent behaviors and motivate a deep understanding of the relationship between molecular conformation, molecular stacking, electronic structure, and luminescence behaviors.

### 2.6. Clusterization-Triggered Emission (CTE)

For molecular fluorescence, there is no doubt that a p-conjugated framework with delocalized p electrons is necessary for generating the fluorescence. However, at the aggregate level, things are different, and materials that possess only heteroatoms (N, O, S) or isolated phenyl ring/heterocycles with totally nonconjugated structures can still show bright visible emission in their aggregates or the solid state.[9e] The luminescence of a nonconjugated system was reported in 17th century, when Sir Francis Bacon introduced the emission of sugar under the influence of mechanical forces in the book “Advancement of Learning” in 1605.[9e] Although more and more nonconjugated systems such as cellulose and protein have since been reported to show luminescence, this phenomenon was not well understood.[35] In 2007, Tang et al. reported that the nonaromatic poly[(maleic anhydride)-alt-(vinyl acetate)] showed blue fluorescence in its colloidal suspension but no fluorescence in dilute solution, exhibiting a property similar to that displayed by AIEgens.[36] Similar phenomena were observed prior to or since 2007 for siloxanes, poly(amidoamine), and polypeptides.[37] The visible emissions from these nonconjugated macromolecules suggests that new chromophores with effective electron delocalization and suitable band gap must be formed in aggregates or the solid state prior to or after excitation. However, it is still not clear what chromophores are formed in the aggregates or the solid state due to the lack of solid experimental data. Zhu et al. reported that the emission colors of these nonconjugated luminogens range from blue to even red, depending on the size of the aggregates. This implies that the degree of aggregation or the intermolecular interactions possibly contribute greatly to the visible emission of these nonconventional luminophores.[38] Qin, Tang et al. rationally designed a series of maleic anhydride (MA)-based polymers and explored the influence of heteroatom interactions on their emissions.[39] As shown in their study, the oligomers of maleic anhydride (OMAh4) show bright blue emission in solution and yellow emission in the solid state. However, the poly[(maleic anhydride)-alt-(2,4,4-trimethyl-1-pentene)] (PMP) copolymers, in which the C=O···C=O or O···O interactions are prevented by tert-butyl groups, show no emission either in solution or in the solid state. These results indicate that both the intramolecular and intermolecular heteroatom interactions contribute to the visible emission of the MA-based polymers. On the basis of these discoveries, Tang et al. proposed that the adjacent O atom may form clusters with delocalized electron distribution through the C=O···C=O or O···O interactions, and the cluster may work as a chromophore of the nonconjugated OMAh4. They also denoted this kind of emission as CTE. Additionally, the emission was called clusteroluminescence, and materials possessing CTE properties were labelled as clusteroluminogens.[9e] The study of CTE helps understand the autofluorescence of a living body and the phenomenon of bioluminescence. Clusteroluminogens also work as an important supplement to traditional arene-based luminophores, since they are more biocompatible and eco-friendly.

### 2.7. Through-Space Interaction (TSI)

Since CTE systems lack typical conjugated chromophores, unveiling the underlying mechanism of their chromophore formation is thus significant for a deeper understanding of the CTE phenomenon. Tang et al. reported on the AIE properties of nonconjugated tetraphenylethylene derivatives (s-TPE).[40] As shown in their study, s-TPE and s-TPE-TM are completely nonconjugated because their four phenyl rings are connected by two sp3-hybridized carbon atoms. However, both s-TPE and s-TPE-TM exhibit AIE behavior and emission in the visible region under UV irradiation. s-TPE even showed an emission wavelength comparable with that of conjugated tetraphenylethylene (TPE). Calculations indicate that in the excited state, the two neighboring phenyl rings of s-TPE get closer to each other to allow electron communication, which in turn decreases the energy gap and leads to a red-shift of the emission. Based on these results, they proposed that the intramolecular through-space conjugation played a major role in the chromophore formation and was responsible for the emission of s-TPE in the visible region. At the same time, McGonigal et al. investigated the emission behavior of a series of phenyl-ring-substituted annulenes bearing three, five, six, and seven phenyl groups and demonstrated that a through-space aromatic-dimer was formed in the excited state, which contributed to the shift of the luminescence wavelength.[41] Tang’s group also demonstrated that the green emission of nonconjugated polymers is ascribed to the through-space interaction (TSI) of heteroatoms and phenyl rings.[42] To further demonstrate the contribution of through-space conjugation to the electron communication, Tang, Zhao et al. systematically compared the conductance of single-molecule wires based on through-space conjugation and through-bond conjugation. They found that molecules with through-space conjugation could exhibit comparable conductance to molecules with through-bond conjugation.[43]

Based on these findings, Tang’s group proposed that TSIs possibly play a key role for the emissions in CTE systems. In general, driven by hydrophobic effects, structural entanglements, inter- and intramolecular electrostatic interactions produced by dipole or transient dipoles, or even aggregation, the nonconjugated systems get closer and thus lead to the formation of cluster luminogens. Within the clusters, the TSI originating from n–s*, n–p*, p–p*, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions, and other weak interactions allows electron communication, resulting in a narrow band gap and thus the generation of clusteroluminescence.[9e]

### 2.8. Mechanoluminescence (ML)

Apart from photoluminescence, mechanoluminescence (ML) represents another kind of fascinating emission phenomenon involving the transformation of mechanical energy to visible light. Although it has been known since 1605, its emission mechanism was not fully understood.[44] Moreover, since ML is usually generated by the macroscopic crystal form of a compound, it is almost impossible to investigate its emission mechanism at the molecular level. However, aggregate science provides an excellent platform to study ML.

Although scientists at different times have tried hard to propose a universal model to explain the underlying mechanism of ML, these attempts have mostly ended up unsatisfactory.[45] Overall, it is generally thought that the electrical field or the electrical discharge generated during the fracture process plays a key role in the ML phenomenon, while the dispute mainly focuses on how the emission happens.[46,47] The proposed explanations include:
1) The emission originates from gas discharge
2) ML is related to the energy transfer from the excited gas to the luminescent center
3) The gas discharge and energy transfer mechanism coexist

These explanations are supported by experimental data for specific conditions and cases. However, all three also have their limitations and are not applicable for all the cases.[45] Zink et al. and Chandra et al. proposed the theory of electron bombardment, which seems applicable for most ML from the fracture of organic or inorganic crystals.[48] They proposed that the fracture of the materials produces new surfaces accompanied with the generation of electron bombardments, in which the energy of the generated electrons can be up to +5 eV, corresponding to a wavelength ≈ 250 nm. Therefore, the energy transfer from electron bombardment to the crystal is strong enough to excite most ML materials with a typical luminescent center. However, for compounds without typical luminescent centers, the mechanism is still being debated. In the early days, the ML of sugar and some inorganic crystals was thought to have originated from gas discharge (N2 emission) because these materials do not contain typical luminescent centers. However, from the viewpoint of clusteroluminescence, their emission is more likely ascribed to the excitation of clusteroluminogens or impurity-doped cluster excitons.[49, 9e]

On the other hand, it is well known that solid luminogens encounter the notorious problem of the ACQ effect, as do the ML luminogens. In this regard, AIE may help to produce more efficient ML luminogens. The first reported AIEgen with ML behavior was TPCI, which is non-emissive in solution but brightly emissive in crystals. Intense blue ML is readily induced upon application of mechanical force. Chi and co-workers later observed that compound P4TA exhibited a bright green emission under the influence of an external force without UV irradiation, whose intensity is much stronger than those of traditional ML materials such as coumarin and phenanthrene. These exciting discoveries may open a new research area for the further development of ML materials. During the investigation of the AIE behavior of TMPE, Li et al. observed a variety of ML properties for the different crystalline forms of TMPE. Further exploration indicated that the molecular packing of TMPE accounts for its ML performance.[51] In general, rigid crystalline packing can effectively lock the non-radiative channels and contribute to efficient ML performance, similar to the inherent RIM mechanism of AIE. Li and co-workers also developed the first AIE system with dual ML emission of mechanical force-induced fluorescence and phosphorescence. Crystal structure analysis coupled with theoretical calculations show that the efficient inter- and intramolecular interactions are the origin of its unique dual emission and contribute much to the ISC transition and the mechanophosphorescence. These results provide new insights for the development of efficient ML materials through crystal engineering and molecular design. Additionally, Li et al. found that some phenothiazine derivatives exhibit changeable ML from blue to white and yellow upon continuous stimuli. Further analysis shows that the change of the molecular conformation of the phenothiazine group from quasi-axial to quasi-equatorial is responsible for this dynamic ML.[52b] Overall, with the emergence of AIE, ML materials have been endowed with new vitality. With the help of crystal engineering, calculations, and advanced X-ray diffraction technologies, the relationship between the molecular arrangement and emission properties has been established, thereby further advancing the fundamental understanding of ML.

### 2.9. Circularly Polarized Luminescence (CPL)

Chirality is ubiquitous in nature and almost all living systems depend on chiral structures at the molecular, supramolecular, and polymeric level.[53] Circularly polarized light is considered to be one of the key factors related with the origin of chirality.[54] Moreover, it has found important applications in many advanced optical technologies such as optical data storage, chiral recognition, and 3D displays.[53] Therefore, research on the generation of CPL is of both fundamental importance and practical value. The luminescent dissymmetry factor and the luminescence efficiency are two key factors that need to be taken into consideration in developing CPL materials. The luminescent dissymmetry factor can be calculated by using the formula gem = 2(IL–IR)/(IL + IR), in which I is the fluorescence intensity of the left (L) and right (R) CPL.[55] Known organic small organic molecules generally show a glum of 10@5–10@3. When they form self-assembled aggregates or helical assemblies, the glum can be amplified by one or two orders of magnitude.[56] Therefore, molecular aggregates at or beyond the meso-scale level are promising candidates to produce systems with high glum values. However, traditional luminophores usually show high luminescence only at the molecular level. Once they aggregate and form ensembles, the quantum efficiency decreases significantly. At this stage, a conflict exists between ACQ and aggregation-amplified CPL. Fortunately, AIE is able to solve this conflict elegantly, as it not only enhances the luminescence efficiency in aggregates but is also compatible with the self-assembly process and thus amplifies the CPL signal.[57]

Liu et al. introduced AIEgens into the design of CPL materials in 2012. They synthesized a chiral adduct by attaching two mannose moieties as side chains to an AIE-active tetraphenylsilole with strong turquoise emission. The resulting compound shows no CPL in solution but interestingly, the molecular assemblies obtained by microfluidic channels show extraordinarily high glum values ranging from −0.08 to −0.32. These results demonstrate the phenomenon of aggregation-induced CPL.[58] Such a design strategy was further extended to other AIE systems which often displayed glum values of over 10@3.[59] An example is the chiral AIEgen called TPE-DVAL. TPE-DVAL is AIE-active and shows no emission in solution but enhanced emission in the aggregated form. Interestingly, its circular dichroism (CD) and CPL spectra show similar trends and strong signals are only observed in the aggregated state. Characterization by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) showed that helical structures were formed in aggregates. Due to the high luminescence efficiency and the high glum value, Tang and co-workers used this chiral AIEgen as emitting layer to fabricate circularly polarized organic light-emitting diodes (CPOLEDs), which exhibited high external quantum efficiency of up to 9.3% and 3.5% for the doped and neat films, respectively. More interestingly, from doped film to neat film, the electroluminescence dissymmetry factor (gEL) showed an amplification of almost three orders of magnitude.[60] Besides using single chiral AIEgens to generate CPL, doped systems using chiral/achiral AIEgens and achiral/chiral matrices were also developed. For instance, Zhao, Tang et al. prepared a chiral photoluminescent liquid crystal (N*-LC) by introducing the AIEgen TPE-PPE into a mixture of nematic liquid crystals (N-LC) and a right-handed chiral dopant, which showed selective reflection and CPL upon applying a direct current electric field.[61] Liu and co-workers demonstrated that chiral AIEgens can co-assemble with achiral luminogens to form helical structures, as a result of which the CPL signal is amplified through chirality and energy transfer from the chiral AIEgen to the achiral luminogen.[62] Therefore, at the aggregate level, AIE can function as a platform compatible with various self-assembly processes to achieve CPL materials with both high luminescence efficiency and large glum.

Stereogenic centers and chiral additives are usually necessary to induce an asymmetric arrangement of molecules to form helical assemblies. However, at the aggregate level, the achiral AIEgen itself can even form helical assemblies without incorporating any chiral additives or external stimuli.[63] For example, in TPE crystals, the four phenyl peripheries can rotate in clockwise or anticlockwise directions to form M or P configurations, respectively, to achieve the transformation from achiral to chiral. TPE substituted with ethyne groups retains this capability. A similar phenomenon was also observed in hexaphenylsilole (HPS) and tetraphenylpyrazine derivatives with immobilized phenyl rings (TPP-cage). A well aligned helical texture can be identified in the crystalline films of these latent chiral AIEgens. However, in solution, all these TPE and silole derivatives are CD-silent due to the rapid reversible change in configuration. These compounds are therefore a good example of the new opportunities offered by aggregation of molecules.

### 2.10. Aggregation-Induced Generation of Reactive Oxygen Species (AIG-ROS)

Until now, we have discussed a lot about the radiative decay of the excited state, including fluorescence, phosphorescence, and delayed fluorescence. However, apart from these radiative decay processes, the exciton may also undergo other deactivation pathways such as internal conversion to release energy as heat, or transfer an electron (type 1) to 3O2 to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide anions (O2•−), hydroxyl radicals (•OH), and peroxides (O22−) or transfer energy (type 2) to 3O2 to afford 1O2.[10h, 66] ROS are important for photodynamic therapy (PDT) applications which has brought about significant advances for treating skin, breast, and lung tumors.[67] The luminogens capable of generating ROS are known as photosensitizers (PSs). To generate ROS, the singlet exciton of PSs first needs to undergo the intersystem crossing to produce a triplet exciton. Traditional PSs such as porphyrin derivatives generally have planar structures and extended conjugated p systems and are easy to aggregate under physiological conditions. As a result, they show a high ROS generation efficiency in solution but a much lower ROS generation efficiency in aggregates, because the strong p–p stacking can greatly accelerate the non-radiative decay of the exciton and thereby reduce the efficiency of ISC and ROS generation.[68]

In contrast, many AIEgens display high ROS generation efficiency in the aggregated state but low or no ROS generation in the solution state.[10e, 67] The poor ROS generation in the solution state was due to active intramolecular motion, which accelerates the non-radiative decay, resulting in inefficient ISC and destabilization of the triplet state. However, in aggregates, the non-radiative decay was effectively suppressed and the ISC efficiency as well as the stability of the triplet exciton are improved, leading to the high ROS generation efficiency. This unique phenomenon is referred to as AIG-ROS. AIG-ROS is particularly suitable for fabricating nano PSs, which combine the advantages of the high targeting ability of nanoparticles and the high ROS generation efficiency of AIEgens. An example shows the AIG-ROS of an AIEgen named TPANPF6, and the decomposition of 9,10-anthracenediylbis-(methylene)dimalonic acid (ABDA) was used as an indicator to illustrate the ROS generation efficiency of TPANPF6. In a dilute dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution of TPANPF6, there is almost no ROS generation. With gradual addition of water into the DMSO solution, aggregates of TPANPF6 gradually form followed by a rapid enhancement of the ROS generation.

According to a first-order perturbation theory approach and the Marcus semiclassical approach in the room-temperature regime, both large SOC constants and small ΔEST values are beneficial for efficient ISC and contribute to efficient ROS generation.[21a,b] However, at the molecular level, it is difficult to elucidate the relationship between ΔEST and ROS generation efficiency because the commonly used strategy to tune ΔEST is the introduction of twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) effects to enhance molecular motion in solution so as to quench the triplet exciton.[69] At the aggregate level, these issues could be easily solved. Liu’s group prepared nanoparticles of tetraphenylethylene derivatives with donor–acceptor structures and systematically investigated the relationship between ΔEST and the efficiency of ROS generation. Their results indicate that extended p-conjugation and strong D–A interaction lead to small ΔEST values. More interestingly, at the aggregate level, the nanoparticles based on molecules with small ΔEST generally show higher ROS generation. Therefore, aggregate science also makes valuable contributions to the development of molecular science. Notably, the aggregation process can also enhance the emission of PSs. Liu’s group demonstrated that nanoparticles prepared by nanocrystallization increased the generation of singlet oxygen by a photosensitizer by 50% and at the same time the fluorescence quantum yield more than doubled.[71] Then nanocrystals have been applied directly for HeLa cell ablation, and are found to be considerably more effective than their amorphous counterparts. The strong emission of AIE-type PSs show great advantages in theranostic applications such as apoptosis process monitoring, image-guided cancer therapy, and image-guided bacteria killing.[67, 72]

### 2.11. Photothermal (PT) and Photoacoustic (PA) Processes

The release of absorbed light energy as heat is one of the main non-radiative decay pathways of excited molecules. Therefore, the non-radiative decay of excited molecules can be utilized to produce photothermal (PT) materials.[73] Photothermal materials are promising for many applications such as seawater desalination, in photothermal-electrical converters, in photoacoustic (PA) imaging, and in PT therapy.[74] AIEgens generally show active intramolecular motion in the solution state that facilitates the non-radiative decay and converts the light energy to heat efficiently.[10i] Thus, is it possible to utilize such intramolecular motion induced photothermy (iMIPT) effects as a design strategy to produce highly efficient PT materials?

It is worth noting that PT materials are normally applied in aqueous media (e.g. for bio-applications or sea water desalination), in which organic luminophores incline to form aggregates with restricted intramolecular motion. Therefore, to apply iMIPT in PT materials production, the challenge is how to achieve active intramolecular motion in aggregates or in the solid state. Tang et al. combined the design strategies of side-chain engineering, twisted intramolecular charge transfer, and molecular motion, and designed a series of rotor-containing donor–acceptor molecules with long, branched alkyl chains.[10i] In their molecular design, the long-chained alkyl group is expected to enable the spatial isolation of molecules in aggregates, providing the necessary room for free molecular motion. The combination of expanded p systems and strong electron-withdrawing acceptors with TPE on the other hand, contributes to the long wavelength absorption, high molar absorptivity, and strong TICT effect, which further enhances their light-energy harvesting capability and non-radiative decay. Nanoparticle suspensions based on one of the representative compounds (2TPE-2NDTA) exhibited a high temperature of 81.4 °C upon exposure to laser irradiation (808 nm) for 300 s. The photothermal conversion achieves an efficiency up to 54.9%, which is much higher than that achieved with small molecules and polymers such as methylene blue and PCPDTBT in control experiments.[74c] To confirm whether 2TPE-2NDTA can really achieve molecular motion in aggregates and whether the non-emission behavior in the solid state is due to active intramolecular motion, they used solid-state NMR (SSNMR) and PL spectroscopy to monitor the molecular motion behavior of the iMIPT molecules. The decay time of SSNMR was used to evaluate the molecular motion of molecules.[75] In comparison with TPE, 2TPE-2NDTA shows much shorter SSNMR decay times at room temperature, suggestive of its rapid excited state intramolecular motion. Moreover, 2TPE-2NDTA is non-emissive at room temperature but highly emissive at 77 K due to the restriction of the intramolecular motion. This indicates that the non-emission behavior of 2TPE-2NDTA in the solid state is ascribed to active intramolecular motion. Additionally, the authors also investigated the relationship between the branched side chains and the non-radiative decay efficiency, and the results show that longer branched alkyl chains facilitate more efficient non-radiative decay. Based on these results, they proposed that iMIPT is a reliable strategy for the development of highly efficient photothermal materials. This work provided insights into the fields of nanotechnology and molecular motion. On the basis of the iMIPT concept, Liu et al. synthesized NIRb14, a molecule with long, branched alkyl chains. The active intramolecular motion of NIRb14 enhances the TICT effect and accelerates the non-radiative decay of NIRb14, resulting in superior PT performance (Figure 20). NPs based on NIRb14 have been used for PA image-guided photothermal therapy, which can specifically accumulate in tumor sites and suppress the proliferation capacity of tumor cells.[76] More and more new PT systems based on iMIPT have been reported and applied in biomedical fields, suggesting the reliability and potential of the iMIPT concept.[77]

### 2.12. Solid-State Molecular Motion (SSMM)

The concept of iMIPT demonstrates the potential of molecular motion in developing novel optical functional materials. However, the potential applications of molecular motion are still limited and further work is urgently required. Although some fascinating concepts like molecular machines have been proposed in recent years, they function mainly in the solution state.[78] The utilization of molecular motion in aggregates or in the solid state for practical applications has been scarcely realized. Garibay et al. designed a series of molecules with dumbbell-shaped architecture and successfully detected the molecular rotation in crystals.[75b,79] During the study of CIE, Tang et al. observed that the CIE molecule BpPDBF exhibited bright emission in the crystal state, while its amorphous powder showed no emission, possibly due to the excited-state molecular motion (SSMM) in the amorphous powder.[10a] After heating at 160 °C for 1 min to crystallize the molecules, BpPDBF becomes much more emissive due to the restriction of the molecular motion in the crystals. This finding motivated the authors to consider the SSMM of AIEgens. Because excited-state intramolecular motion is directly correlated with the luminescent behavior of a luminogen, AIEgens thus enable monitoring of SSMM by recording the changes in the fluorescence. By modifying BpPDBF with flexible alkyl chains to increase the SSMM, Tang et al. synthesized the new AIEgen pDPDBF, whose molecular motion in the solid state is much faster than that of BpPDBF.[80] Furthermore, the molecular motion in the solid state was clearly revealed by the fluorescence change. As shown in their study, the non-emissive amorphous pDPDBF film becomes increasingly emissive with time at room temperature, demonstrating the formation of crystalline domains through a spontaneous, regular arrangement of molecules. Therefore, the spontaneous molecular motion can be directly seen by recording the change in the fluorescence signal. The response time of the film indicates the rate of SSMM. The fluorescence recovery time of pDPDBF is about 20 min. By using p–p interactions as the driving force to induce molecular crystallization, Tang et al. developed the molecule PIP, which recrystallized within 2 s. Mechanistic studies indicate that PIP displays no emission in the crystalline but bright emission in the amorphous state, due to the strong p–p stacking in the crystals. Scratching the crystalline film destroys the dark-state crystalline domains to turn on its emission. However, the bright areas quickly return to the weakly emissive state within 2 s driven by the strong intermolecular p–p interactions.[81]

## 3. New Advancements of AIE

Scientists have noticed that film morphology and molecular arrangement strongly influence the performance of molecular semiconductors.[82] In biological science, only the multilevel structure of polypeptides rather than the isolated polypeptides can form special proteins with biological function.[83] On closer inspection, nanoscience and supramolecular assembly actually consider the behavior of molecular ensembles rather than single molecules. Nevertheless, until now, molecular science and the study of the structure–property relationships are still the main research methodology applied to understanding materials performance. AIE research highlights the importance of aggregate science in determining and elucidating the properties of macroscopic materials, motivating scientists to consider questions beyond the framework of molecular science. When more scientists devote their time to AIE research, new breakthroughs will keep emerging, which will further enrich and endow new vitality to the AIE galaxy.[84–92] Several examples are given in the Supporting Information of this review to highlight the new advancements. These examples include:
1) BioAIEgens, which are obtained from natural products or their derivatives and thus are biocompatible, degradable, and can be obtained in large quantities
2) X-ray excited AIEgens, which can overcome the challenges of autofluorescence and poor tissue penetration depth of UV/Vis light excitation
3) Clickable AIEgens, which can be bioconjugated simply and efficiently

## 4. Summary and Outlook

This review summarizes the advancements of AIE and its related branches from the viewpoint of molecular science and aggregate science. Special emphasis has been placed on the properties and new functions endowed by the molecular aggregates. At the molecular level, AIE research motivates the exploration of excited-state changes such as radiative decay and non-radiative decay with excited-state intramolecular motion and structural rigidification. At the aggregate level, AIE actually provides an important platform to study the influence of factors such as packing structure, admixture, intermolecular interactions, and aggregate morphology on the performance of macroscopic materials. From molecules to aggregates, molecular properties may be retained or lost during the aggregation process. More interestingly, new properties or functions that are absent in molecular species may emerge at the aggregate level. AIE research thus emphasizes the significance of aggregate science together with molecular science for materials development.

In the last 20 years, AIE research has witnessed great achievements, including mechanistic understanding, structure–property relationships, and applications. Owing to its extensive applications, AIE research is attracting more and more attention from chemistry, physics, materials science, and biomedical science and shows promising applications in these fields. In spite of these achievements, detailed information about the excited state in AIE processes is not yet available and remains a big challenge. New characterization techniques such as ultrafast spectroscopy, solid-state NMR, neutron scattering, and theoretical calculations will possibly help to get more insight into the excited-state characteristics of the AIE process in the near future.

As a general platform for studying aggregate science, AIE keeps combining with other research fields involving materials, biology, energy, and the environment, and injects new vitality into these fields. As more researchers start working on this field, more breakthroughs in both fundamental research and application are anticipated in the near future.