# Bringing Inherent Charges into Aggregation-Induced Emission Research

## Abstract
CONSPECTUS: Charged organic molecules, such as DNA, RNA, proteins, and polysaccharides, are ubiquitous and indispensable in natural living systems, which possess specific biological functions to interact with oppositely charged species via electrostatic attraction. The molecules with inherent charges typically differentiate themselves from the neutral ones with unique attributes (e.g., ionic interactions and high polarity), thereby playing a pivotal role in a broad spectrum of areas, including supramolecular chemistry, structural biology, and materials science. It is thus of great importance to explore and develop various charged organic systems for biomimicry and the creation of functional materials. In 2001, our group reported a peculiar luminogen that exhibited weak emission in solution but had significantly enhanced emission in aggregates, and we, for the first time, coined this phenomenon as aggregation-induced emission (AIE). The AIE concept significantly changes the cognition of the scientific community toward classic photophysical phenomena. Since the discovery of this unusual luminescence phenomenon, AIE luminogens (AIEgens) have attracted extensive attention from researchers in a plethora of disciplines because of their high brightness in aggregates, large Stokes shift, excellent photostability, and good biocompatibility. In the past 10 years, our laboratory has expended a great amount of effort to bring inherent charges into AIE research and acquired fruitful achievements. In this Account, we summarize the progress of charged AIE systems primarily made by our laboratory. We start with a brief introduction to charged AIEgens and then discuss their design strategies from molecular and topological perspectives, respectively. Next, we review the unique properties of charged AIEgens, including D − A interactions, anion − π+ interactions, and intermolecular electrostatic interactions, with an emphasis on how they differentiate themselves from the neutral analogs. On the one hand, positively charged AIEgens exhibit unique photophysical properties by forming typical donor − acceptor structures to manipulate the emission wavelength or initiate ultralong persistent luminescence. On the other hand, positively charged AIEgens exhibit unique physiochemical properties, such as an adjustable targeting capability toward biological targets and a strong capability for the generation of reactive oxygen species. Furthermore, we showcase the applications of charged AIEgens in imaging and diagnosis, photodynamic therapy, gas separation, and solar desalination. Finally, we conclude this Account with a summary and some perspectives regarding the existing challenges and future directions. We hope that this Account can spark new ideas and inspire scientists from different disciplines to explore this nascent yet promising research area.

1. INTRODUCTION
Charged organic species are widespread in natural living systems, which play a crucial role in a variety of biological processes, such as DNA transcription, protein folding, and cellular signal transduction.5,6 The root cause of why nature adopts charged molecules probably lies in their unique physiochemical properties, including dynamic ionic interactions, excellent water solubility, high mobility, high conductivity, and structural and functional flexibility.7 To unravel the mystery of sophisticated biological machinery and develop new functional materials, scientists have devoted considerable effort to the study of charged organic systems. For example, the onset of DNA nanotechnology in the 1980s greatly profited from the precise self-assembly of charged biological materials, leading to the establishment of a series of compelling areas (e.g., DNA origami).8 Inspired by natural polyelectrolytes (e.g., DNA, RNA, proteins, and polysaccharides), synthetic polyelectrolytes have been developed to understand their formation mechanisms and biological functions. Besides, certain functional components have also been introduced into synthetic polyelectrolytes to enable extra functionalities beyond nature.9 Over the past few decades, scientists have set up a plethora of research frontiers related to charged organic molecules and have actively explored their practical applications, including energy,10 environmental,11 and biomedical fields.12

In 2001, our group reported an unusual luminescence phenomenon of a propeller-shaped organic molecule 1-methyl-1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenylsilole, which was weakly emissive in solution but showed remarkably enhanced emission in aggregates.13 This unique phenomenon was defined as aggregation-induced emission (AIE), which significantly breaks the constraints of aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) and thereby changes the cognition of the scientific community toward classic photophysical phenomena. In contrast to conventional ACQ luminogens, AIE luminogens (AIEgens) exhibit a multitude of benefits, such as high brightness in aggregates, low background fluorescence, excellent photostability, and good biocompatibility, making them an attractive class of luminescent materials.14,15 Nevertheless, these prominent advantages are somewhat underutilized in the early stage. Specifically, early studies primarily focused on the development of neutral AIEgens with short-wavelength emission as exemplified by tetraphenylethylene (TPE), hexaphenylsilole (HPS), and their derivatives.16 In terms of practical utilization, these materials were deficient in functionality and specificity. Later on, the introduction of inherent charges into AIEgens largely broadened the scope of AIE research. At the beginning, charged AIEgens were designed to identify given analytes with opposite charges through electrostatic interactions.17 Afterward, the assembly behaviors of charged AIEgens were desirably employed to construct various functional systems, including light-harvesting materials,18 circularly polarized luminescent materials,19 supramolecular organic room-temperature phosphorescence (RTP) materials,20 highly emissive metallacages,21 and pure organic cages.22 Furthermore, the photophysical behaviors and photochemical processes of charged AIEgens were desirably tuned simply by varying the counterions.3,23

The combination of inherent charges and AIE opens up a brand new and hot frontier in chemical research and has yielded fruitful achievements in the past decade. However, there is a lack of prior publications that systematically elaborate on the research progress of charged AIE systems. In this Account, we aim to provide an in-depth overview of the fundamentals of inherently charged AIE systems and answer some critical scientific questions. For example, how can one achieve the rational design of charged AIE systems with the desired properties? How do charged AIEgens differentiate themselves from the neutral ones? Why are they ideal candidates for specific applications? Specifically, we start with a discussion of the design strategies of charged AIEgens from molecular and topological perspectives, respectively. Next, we review the unique properties of charged AIEgens, including D − A interactions, anion − π+ interactions, and intermolecular electrostatic interactions, with an emphasis on how they differentiate themselves from the neutral analogs. Furthermore, we showcase the applications of charged AIEgens in imaging and diagnosis, photodynamic therapy, gas separation, and solar desalination. Finally, we conclude this Account with a summary and some perspectives regarding the existing challenges and future directions.

2. DESIGN STRATEGIES OF CHARGED AIEGENS
### 2.1. From a Molecular Perspective
In terms of designing charged AIEgens, the AIE moieties and the corresponding counterions are two indispensable components. To endow charged molecules with AIE characteristics, one popular strategy is to decorate the ionic core with adequate aromatic rotors (Figure 1A, left), exemplified by the phenyl ring, pyridine, naphthalene, anthracene, and pyrene.1,3,24 In good solvents, these rotors have active intramolecular rotations to dramatically consume the excitation energy via nonradiative transition. In contrast, the molecular motions are significantly restricted in aggregates or in the solid state, leading to the suppressed nonradiative decay and thus the activation of the radiative channel. Another design strategy is to functionalize previously reported neutral AIEgens with one or more charged units (Figure 1A, right). Among various building blocks, TPE and triphenylamine (TPA) are two classes of representative AIE moieties for the construction of charged AIEgens (Figure 1B). TPE and its derivatives are the most reliable moieties to initiate the AIE effect (even after attachment with a variety of functional groups), which can be seen in a large portion of charged AIEgens.25−27 Notably, although TPE is a weak electron donor, its electron-donating ability can be reinforced by substituting the phenyl rings with electron donors such as alkoxy groups.26 Being another class of AIE moieties, TPA and its derivatives are intrinsically strong electron donors due to the presence of a lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom. When an appropriate cation is attached to the TPA moiety, a typical donor − acceptor (D − A) structure is formed, which is a common strategy for red-shifting the absorption and emission spectra of luminescent materials.28−31

On the basis of these two design strategies, our group has developed a plethora of charged AIEgens with diverse functionalities. To date, a library of organic cations has been delicately established (Figure 1C). Specifically, nonaromatic quaternary ammonium 1 and quaternary phosphonium 2 can endow charged AIEgens with improved water solubility.31−33 Relative to nonaromatic cations, aromatic cations (either single or multiple rings, 3−14) can bring about additional optical and electronic properties for charged AIEgens due to the introduction of delocalized π electrons. Among various aromatic cations, pyridinium 5 is most commonly used because it can be easily generated through an SN2 reaction between the pyridine group and organic halides.34 Besides, with the rapid development of ring-closing metathesis and C−H activation/annulation reactions,35 an increasing number of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon cations with high complexity and heteroatoms have been exploited.4,36−38 It is noteworthy that as the extension of the aromatic structure, the hydrophobicity of the resulting molecules is gradually increased, leading to decreased water solubility. In terms of the anions, both inorganic (e.g., halide ions, BF4−, and PF6−) and organic (e.g., CF3SO3− and BPh4−) groups have been demonstrated (Figure 1D). In principle, they can be directly incorporated through chemical reactions38 or introduced postreaction through ion exchange.39 In most cases, anions simply act as the counterion of the cationic AIE moiety.40−42 However, some organic anions are covalently attached to the AIE moiety to yield negatively charged AIEgens.43 Notably, the presence of counterions has a prominent impact on the solubility,40 toxicity,44 crystal packing,23 and photophysical properties,3 providing a facile approach for modulating the performance of the resulting charged AIEgens.

### 2.2. From a Topological Perspective
Chemistry topology is becoming particularly important due to its significant impact on material performance. In this regard, our group has expended great effort to build a series of charged AIEgens featured as distinct molecular architectures. On the one hand, the charged moieties can be utilized as repeating units either in the backbone36 or in the side chain45 to form linear or hyperbranched polymers (i.e., polyelectrolytes, Figure 2A). In contrast to small-molecule analogs, linear polyelectrolytes typically exhibit red-shifted absorption and emission as well as enhanced photosensitization due to the strengthened conjugation effect.45 Besides, the entanglement of polymer chains within these linear polyelectrolytes gives rise to improved mechanical strength and processability, facilitating their real-world applications in the form of large-area thin films through simple spin coating. Notably, combined with AIE behavior, the resulting polyelectrolyte thin films are highly fluorescent and are ideal candidates for a variety of applications such as photopatterning.36 Unlike one-dimensional linear polyelectrolytes, the polymer chains in the hyperbranched polyelectrolytes can simultaneously elongate in three dimensions. Such a three-dimensional (3D) structure is typically associated with decreased chain entanglement and increased charge density in the backbone.4 In addition, the compact structure of hyperbranched polyelectrolytes partially restricts intramolecular motions, leading to the formation of single-molecule aggregates even in dilute solution.46 On the other hand, during the course of noncovalent assembly, ionic interactions play a decisive role in regulating the orientation and arrangement of small-molecule charged AIEgens. Such a stable noncovalent linkage can be employed to build supramolecular frameworks (Figure 2B).47 Interestingly, through the rational design of the molecular geometry and coordination modes of charged AIEgens, it is possible to tune the pore size and tunnel shape of the resulting supramolecular frameworks. Typically, supramolecular assemblies exhibit reversibly transformed properties due to their intrinsic noncovalent assembly manner. During such a process, AIE can serve as a useful tool to dynamically monitor the assembly behavior, providing an opportunity for the development of stimuli-responsive luminescent systems.48

3. PROPERTIES OF CHARGED AIEGENS
As an attractive class of luminescent materials, charged AIEgens simultaneously possess the unique properties of AIE and (poly)electrolytes. Since the advantages of AIE have been largely discussed elsewhere, we herein focus our discussion on the extra properties introduced by the charged moieties, including D − A interactions, anion − π+ interactions, and intermolecular electrostatic interactions.

### 3.1. D−A Interactions
In principle, the cationic moieties of charged AIEgens are electron-deficient, making them ideal electron acceptors to facilitate intra- and intermolecular D − A interactions. In terms of intramolecular D − A interactions, the hybridization of frontier orbitals between the donor and the acceptor typically results in a narrowed energy band gap; thus, the energy levels of charged AIEgens can be rationally tuned through the selection of suitable donor and acceptor units.26,30,38 In polar environments, the excited charged AIEgens undergo fast intramolecular electron transfer from the donor to the acceptor, leading to the conformational transition from a locally excited (LE) state to a twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) state and thus red-shifted emission (Figure 3A).37,49 As a result, charged AIEgens are ideal candidates for the construction of polarity-sensitive fluorescent probes. In an example, TVPA, a cationic AIEgen with a typical D − A structure (chemical structure in Figure 3B), showed a pronounced solvatochromic effect, with its emission color shifting from blue (λem = 436 nm) to red (λem = 610 nm) when the solvent varied from nonpolar toluene to highly polar methanol (Figure 3C).29 Taking advantage of the TICT effect of TVPA, it was possible to visualize the microphase separation and hydrophilicity-to-hydrophobicity transformation of thermoresponsive composite hydrogels in response to temperature variations.

Unlike intramolecular D − A interactions, the intermolecular D − A interactions between positively charged AIEgens and electron donors can facilitate intermolecular charge transfer, charge separation, and charge migration, providing an opportunity for the construction of organic long-persistent luminescent systems. In a proposed model (Figure 3D), the photoinduced charge transfer occurs between the donor and acceptor to generate a pair of radicals, which is followed by charge separation and multistep charge migration among the acceptors. The excited radical eventually recombines with a donor radical, leading to the release of energy in the form of light. On the basis of this working mechanism, our group developed a dual organic system with the electron-deficient quaternary phosphonium bromide salt TPP-3C2B as the acceptor and the electron-rich aromatic amine DMA as the donor (chemical structures in Figure 3E).2 In this system, TPP-3C2B not only served as the electron acceptor to favor photoinduced charge transfer but also stabilized the excited radicals by suppressing unwanted reactions via the bulky phenyl rings and favoring radical delocalization across the phenyl rings. In this case, the electron was subjected to particularly slow charge recombination, giving rise to visible afterglow luminescence with a duration of up to 7 h, which is barely seen in previous studies (Figure 3F).

### 3.2. Anion−π+ Interactions
In terms of positively charged aromatic AIEgens, there exists a strong affinity between the aromatic cations and the counter-anions due to electrostatic forces and ion-induced polarization, referred to as anion − π+ interactions.38,50 In a recent study, we systematically investigated the role of anion − π+ interactions in the manipulation of the photophysical properties of luminogens (Figure 4A). In traditional neutral luminogens (e.g., TriPO-C, Figure 4B), π−π stacking dominated intermolecular interactions (Figure 4C), leading to the occurrence of ACQ due to molecular aggregation.1 Nevertheless, the detrimental π−π stacking could be suppressed through the introduction of anion − π+ interactions, which facilitated the ACQ-to-AIE transformation. For example, a powder of TriPO-PN (a charged analog of TriPO-C) exhibited a typical AIE phenomenon with a fluorescence quantum yield that was ca. 7-fold higher than that in solution. Crystallographic analysis indicated that two PF6− anions were located on both sides of the cationic oxazole core at distances of 3.385 and 3.416 Å, which could serve as built-in blockers to impede π−π stacking (Figure 4D). Besides, by introducing heavy halide ions (e.g., Br− and I−) into the oxazolium system, the resulting molecules exhibited both AIE and RTP characteristics. In TPO-Br (another charged analog of TriPO-C), the heavy atom Br− was spatially close to the cationic chromophore due to the anion − π+ interactions (Figure 4E).3 In this situation, the intersystem crossing (ISC) channel was desirably switched on, causing the powder of TPO-Br to exhibit detectable RTP with a lifetime of up to 706 μs.

### 3.3. Intermolecular Electrostatic Interactions
Electrostatic interactions (i.e., opposite charges attract whereas identical charges repel) are a ubiquitous physical phenomenon, which play an important role in materials science. On the one hand, composite materials with all-in-one functionalities can be easily fabricated by means of intermolecular electrostatic interactions, which not only expand the diversity and functionality of charged AIE systems but also favor the construction of synergistic theranostic systems (i.e., “1+1>2”).51,52 In a recent study, our group fabricated an organic/inorganic hybrid nanomaterial through the electrostatic interactions between positively charged AIEgens and negatively charged 2D nanosheets of black phosphorus.53 Furthermore, we explored its application in the near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence−photothermal dual-imaging-guided synergistic photodynamic−photothermal therapies. On the other hand, positively charged AIEgens can selectively bind with negatively charged biological species (e.g., DNA, mitochondrial membranes, and bacterial membranes) and sensitively probe their residing microenvironment through real-time fluorescence feedback (Figure 5A).17,25,32,49 Combined the electrostatic interactions with the TICT effect, a cationic AIEgen IQ-Cm (chemical structure in Figure 5B) could be used to target the negative surfaces of E. coli (Gram-negative bacteria), S. aureus (Gram-positive bacteria), and C. albicans (fungi).54 Because of the distinct membrane structures and membrane compositions, IQ-Cm exhibited three different “turn-on” fluorescence (Figure 5C), which was probably attributed to the differential binding sites of these microorganisms. The zeta potential results showed that in contrast to S. aureus and C. albicans, IQ-Cm significantly neutralized the negative charge of E. coli (Figure 5D), suggesting the surface association with E. coli and deep penetration into S. aureus and C. albicans. It is worth noting that by varying the number and type of the ionic moieties, it is possible to tune the binding strength and targeting capability of charged AIEgens toward biological analytes.33,55,56

4. APPLICATIONS OF CHARGED AIEGENS
By virtue of the unique properties of charged AIEgens, a large number of applications have been delicately exploited, including imaging and diagnosis, photodynamic therapy, gas separation, and solar desalination. These applications are separately discussed in the following sections.

### 4.1. Imaging and Diagnosis
Charged AIEgens are ideal materials for imaging and diagnosis applications due to their tunable targeting capability, high brightness in aggregates, low background signal, and high resistance to photobleaching, which are barely seen in traditional ACQ dyes. On the one hand, charged AIEgens can be used to monitor complicated cellular processes and reflect key physiological and pathological changes.27,39,56 In a recent study, our group developed a series of pyridinium-containing AIEgens for the selective identification of cancer cells over normal cells, which was favorably achieved because of the differential mitochondrial membrane potential.34 Besides, during photodynamic therapy (PDT)-induced cell apoptosis, these charged AIEgens could undergo mitochondrion-to-nucleus translocation, enabling in situ monitoring of the PDT effect through real-time fluorescence signals. In contrast to in vitro cellular imaging, in vivo bioimaging is particularly challenging because of the strong tissue absorption, scattering, and autofluorescence.14 To overcome these limitations, we developed an NIR-emissive charged AIEgen MTTT-BT (chemical structure in Figure 6A), which possessed high fluorescence brightness, a large tissue-penetration depth, and prominent photoacoustic (PA) signals to facilitate multimodal in vivo imaging.57 Featuring a typical D − A structure and an elongated π-conjugated system, MTTT-BT had an extremely large Stokes shift (over 240 nm) and strong NIR emission with the tail extending to the second NIR (NIR-II, 1000−1700 nm) region. An in vitro cellular imaging study demonstrated that the MTTT-BT dots (i.e., nanoaggregates of MTTT-BT with a hydrodynamic size of ca. 30 nm) could be efficiently internalized by 4T1 cells and located in the lysosomes (Figure 6B). An in vivo imaging study showed that the tumor tissue was specifically visualized by the strong NIR-I, NIR-II, and PA signals even 12 h postinjection (Figure 6C), indicating the selective accumulation of the MTTT-BT dots in the tumor site via passive targeting.

### 4.2. Photodynamic Therapy
In the PDT process, photosensitizers (PSs) in the excited triplet state undergo either type I (electron transfer) or type II (energy transfer) photochemical pathways to produce various reactive oxygen species (ROS) to cause severe cell damage.31,38,45 Given the noninvasive nature, spatiotemporal controllability, negligible drug resistance, low systemic toxicity, and immunostimulatory activity, PDT has emerged as an effective modality for the treatment of cancer and pathogenic infections. Classic ACQ PSs generally show poor ROS production in aggregates because of π−π stacking-caused nonradiative decay (Figure 7A).58 In contrast, the nonradiative transition is significantly suppressed in the aggregates of charged AIE PSs due to the restricted molecular motions. Besides, the energy gap between the singlet and triplet (ΔEst) is also reduced as a result of the strong D − A interactions.28,36 In this case, the ISC process is remarkably unlocked, leading to enhanced ROS generation. Moreover, the electrostatic interactions between positively charged AIEgens and negatively charged biological species can strengthen their proximity in 3D space, which maximize the PDT effect and also facilitate imaging-guided PDT. In an example, we developed four charged AIE PSs with different degrees of D − A interactions (TBZPy < MTBZPy < TNZPy < MTNZPy; chemical structure in Figure 7B).59 These AIEgens exhibited poor ROS generation in DMSO due to the active molecular motions (Figure 7C); on the contrary, ROS generation was markedly enhanced when aggregates were formed in aqueous environments (Figure 7D). Among them, TNZPy and MTNZPy displayed type-I ROS generation due to the strong intramolecular charge transfer, enabling them to photodynamically kill cancer cells both in normoxia and in hypoxia (Figure 7E). In a recent study, we further extended the application scope of PDT and achieved the customizable photodynamic patterning of living organisms with AIE polyelectrolytes (Figure 7F−G), indicating its potential in tissue engineering and biochips.4 In addition to single-mode PDT, we also developed a series of charged AIEgen-based multimode theranostic materials that integrated PDT with photothermal therapy,53,60 chemotherapy,61 and/or phagotherapy,42 which can be used for the establishment of synergistic therapeutic systems.

### 4.3. Gas Separation
In modern society, gas separation is a challenging yet indispensable technique that plays a crucial role in fuel capture, biogas upgrading, and the recovery of industrial byproducts.62 It is thus of great importance to develop cost-effective and highly selective materials for efficient gas separation. To date, a number of porous materials have been fabricated, in which gas separation is fulfilled on the basis of the size of gas molecules or their affinity for the porous materials. In this aspect, charged AIEgens are emerging as an attractive candidate for the construction of porous materials for gas separation. On the one hand, the ionic interactions among charged AIEgens can facilitate self-assembly to form stable supramolecular frameworks with tunable pore sizes.47,48 On the other hand, the highly polar charged AIEgens can enhance the separation selectivity by exhibiting a strong affinity for polar species.49 Moreover, charged AIEgens typically exhibit polarity-sensitive emission behaviors,29 which endow the materials with a vapochrometric capability during gas sorption/separation and/or porosity transformation to further broaden their applications. In a recent study, we utilized a linear charged AIEgen PCS (chemical structure in Figure 8A) as the molecular brick to construct honeycomb-like supramolecular nanotunnels (pore size = 6.2 Å) via X-aggregation packing.48 The crystal structure of desolvated PCS (PCSD) possessed excellent thermal and chemical stability, which is rarely seen in organic supramolecular frameworks. Gas sorption results confirmed that PCS D absorbed a decent amount of CO2 (2.8 mmol/g) but only a small amount of CH4 (0.26 mmol/g) under the conditions of 273 K and 1 bar. According to the ideal adsorbed solution theory, the CO2/CH4 selectivity was calculated to be 16.8 at 273 K and 7.4 at 298 K, which were some of the highest values among organic supramolecular frameworks under identical conditions. Interestingly, six kinds of solvated crystals (PCSS1−PCSS6) were obtained in different solvents with tunable emission. Notably, the porosity of these solvated crystals could be reversibly transformed from the porous crystals to the nonporous amorphous solid through grinding and vapor fuming, which was attributed to the dynamic noncovalent interactions. More importantly, the transformation process could be clearly visualized by the differential emission colors.

### 4.4. Solar Desalination
Solar desalination is a technique that utilizes solar energy to evaporate seawater and obtain fresh water by collecting the condensed steam, which can potentially address the issue of global water shortages.63 One of the critical problems in solar desalination lies in the development of materials with high solar-to-thermal conversion efficiencies. The intrinsic molecular rotors in charged AIEgens can favor active molecular motions when the molecules are loosely packed, leading to the consumption of the excitation energy via nonradiative decay and thus the generation of heat.60 In view of the D − A interaction-promoted spectral redshift30 and thus efficient photothermal conversion, charged AIEgens are considered to be promising candidates for solar desalination. Compared with traditional photothermal materials (e.g., carbon-based materials), an unparalleled advantage of charged AIEgens is their adequate solubility in common organic solvents, endowing them with excellent processability and thus high compatibility with other manufactured materials. Taking advantage of the broad absorption in the visible region as well as the photothermal effect of MTTT-BT (chemical structure in Figure 9A), we explored its application in solar desalination.64 First, MTTT-BT was doped into poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) to form a 2D electrospun nanofibrous mat and a 3D all-fiber aerogel (AFA, remolded from the 2D mat via lyophilization). In contrast to the 2D electrospun nanofibrous mat that had high light reflection and scattering, the 3D AFA exhibited particularly enhanced light absorption due to the multiple collision of photons within the porous structure. Under 1 sun irradiation, the temperature of the 3D AFA increased to 87 °C within 100 s even without wrapping any thermal insulation materials, indicating its potential in the reduction of heat loss from the irradiated area to the surrounding aqueous environment. Related experimental results demonstrated that the 3D AFA exhibited a solar-to-vapor conversion efficiency of up to 89% under 1 sun irradiation and an evaporation rate of 10.9 kg m−2 day−1 under natural sunlight, suggesting its potential in efficient solar desalination.

5. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
As an emerging class of functional materials, charged AIEgens are attracting increasing attention because of their unique properties that originate from both AIE and (poly)electrolytes, including high brightness in aggregates, low background signals, high resistance to photobleaching, D − A interactions, anion − π+ interactions, and intermolecular electrostatic interactions. In this Account, we summarized our recent activities on the study of charged AIEgens, including the design strategies, unique properties, and applications in imaging and diagnosis, photodynamic therapy, gas separation, and solar desalination.

Despite these achievements, there is still a large potential for further investigations of charged AIE systems. First, although positively charged AIEgens are well established, negatively charged AIEgens remain largely unexplored because of the limited type of organic anions. Since negatively charged AIEgens are expected to display properties distinct from those of the positive analogs, such as cation − π− interactions and opposite recognition behaviors, the development of negatively charged AIEgens is highly preferred to further expand the application scope of charged AIEgens. Second, in terms of molecular topology (e.g., asymmetric, macrocyclic, helical, star-like, dendritic, and ladder-like) and mesoscale self-assembly architectures, the family members of charged AIEgens still need to be enriched, which are critical to the generation of high-performance materials for a variety of high-technology applications. Third, charged AIEgens are one of the promising tools for revealing the mystery of ionic interactions. In a preliminary study, our group developed two AIEgens with opposite charges to build a self-reporting system for the visualization of ionic interactions among electrolytes.65 Looking ahead, an increasing number of charged AIE systems should be exploited to facilitate the understanding of complicated biological processes and enable a multitude of practical applications. It is hoped that this Account can spark new ideas and inspire scientists from diverse disciplines to explore this nascent yet promising research area.