# AggregateScience:fromMolecules,beyondMolecules

## Abstract
Over the past centuries, molecular science has played a dominant role in the advancement of physical science by exploring the structure–property relationships at a single molecular level. However, when molecules form aggregates, a dilemma arises as the structures and properties often differ significantly from those of molecular constituents. To address this, the concept of aggregate science emphasizes a holistic approach to understanding the structures–properties relationship of substances. Despite the recognition of holism in aggregate research, there are still challenges in investigating the complex operations and interplays, particularly in understanding the newly emergent structures and properties in the macroscopic world. Therefore, there is a need to further advance the concept and methodology. In this regard, this perspective highlights three types of influences that aggregation exerts on substance properties: activation, transformation, and emergence. Furthermore, examples from aggregation-induced emission research and related fields are provided to illustrate how aggregate science can be best studied. This perspective emphasizes that the molecule is of significance and the structures and properties are also dramatically influenced by aggregation. Additionally, potential research methodologies, such as focusing on intra- and intermolecular interactions, adjusting aggregate morphology, and regulating the constituents, along with directions, and implications are offered for future studies.

## 1. Introduction
The complexity of macroscopic substances makes it difficult to elucidate the laws or theorems that dominate their macroscopic behavior. The research philosophy of “reductionism” was thus proposed as the primary guideline to investigate the science of macroscopic substances since it advocates to simplify the intricate systems to lower-level components whose structures and inner interactions could be studied by modern analytical technologies.[1] The philosophical connotations of reductionism are voiced as “a whole can be reduced to simpler parts, and the whole is the sum of its individual parts”. This research philosophy works well at the age of the Industrial Revolution when complex machines could be deconstructed to simple parts that could subsequently be reassembled after understanding the parts. Undoubtedly, mechanical reductionism brings about great progress in the period of the Industrial Revolution, further inspiring humanity to explore everything under its guidance.

The popularity of reductionism also influenced the research of physical science area. In particular, molecularism, which emphasizes the role of molecular structure in determining the properties of materials has been widely accepted in organic chemistry.[2] Molecularism focuses on investigating structure–property relationship at a molecular level and believes that the properties in a condensed state are the same with those of molecular components. The popularity of molecularism owning to that it makes the research of macroscopic substances much easier to some extent, and it indeed works well in explaining the complex chemical reaction of compounds and understanding the reaction mechanism. There is no doubt that molecules occupy a central position in laboratory research; however, it is inappropriate to oversell the role of molecular structures in the condensed state when complex aggregations are involved.[3,4] Molecularism takes it for granted that the properties of aggregates are doubtlessly identical to those of their constituent molecules (1 → 1). For example, due to the extended π-conjugation, the polyphenylene vinylene (PPV) molecule is semiconductive, and so is its aggregate. Under excitation, both the molecule and aggregate display similar photoluminescence (PL). Moreover, the well π-conjugation along the framework endows the molecule with good rigidity, and the aggregate exhibits rigidity as well. Conversely, if one property is absent in the molecule, so does its aggregate (0 → 0). For instance, polyethylene glycol (PEG) is nonconductive in its molecular state, and the formed aggregate displays the same features. Similarly, the molecule and aggregate are both achiral and unrigid.

Molecularism is not always idoneous. In many cases, the aggregates do not possess the property that is observed in molecular constituents.[5–7] As shown in Figure 1B, the pyrene molecules, which belong to the aggregation-caused quenching (ACQ) system, are highly photoluminescent in dilute solution, but their aggregates in an aqueous media are non-emissive (1 → 0).[8,9] There is also no lack of 0 → 1 cases, such as aggregation-induced emission (AIE) system.[10,11] The molecular species of hexaphenylsilole are non-emissive, but their aggregates are highly photoluminescent. Such anti-molecularism systems were discovered over a century ago. Apart from PL, many other properties are also changed after forming aggregates in comparison with their molecular species.[12–14] For example, phospholipids are water-soluble in molecular state but their aggregates are water-insoluble.[15] In biological systems, molecularism encounters a larger challenge when applied to understanding the complex processes of living systems. For instance, it is unreasonable to understand the characters and behaviors of living aggregates like organs and life entities, solely based on molecular constituents although they are constituted by the “dead” molecules.[16–20] Obviously, the molecularism derived from reductionism is no longer suitable for elucidating the structure–property relationship of complex systems, particularly when aggregation is involved. A new research paradigm that could overcome the dilemma of molecularism and is more suitable for aggregate systems is highly desirable.

Holism refers to the implication that “a whole is not necessarily determined by its parts alone, and the whole can significantly affect the behaviors of its parts”.[21] A holistic idea of “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts” has been articulated by Aristotle as early as ancient Greek times. In 1967, Philip W. Anderson expressed his holism viewpoint: “The behavior of large and complex aggregates of elementary particles is not to be understood in terms of a simple extrapolation of the properties of a few particles”.[22] When an aggregate is formed by the admixture or assembly of molecular species, its properties may be influenced by various factors, including quantity (quantity of components), geometry (size, shape, and dimension), morphology (amorphous or crystalline), and interaction (attraction or repulsion).[23–27] Multifarious interplays (synergism, antagonism, or multiplicity) may coexist in aggregates.[28–31] Understanding the operations and interplays within an aggregate system with a holistic perspective is thus of both fundamental importance and practical significance.[32,33] Although the significance of holism in aggregate science has been well recognized, how to investigate complex systems and understand the macroscopic world with the assistance of modern characterization technologies still faces tremendous challenges.

Over the past two decades, we have focused on the research of AIE luminogens and endeavored to unveil the essence of aggregate luminescence as distinct from molecular luminescence. AIE research indicates that the complex interactions in the aggregate state could endow materials with new luminescence behavior lacked by the molecules. This kind of aggregation-generated new properties later was further extended to other aspects like reactivity, chirality, and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, etc., which are ultimately summarized and proposed as aggregate science.[34,35]

Aggregate science emphasizes the significance of multibody interactions rather than single molecular structures in determining the properties or performance of materials, which is just what holism advocates.[11,36] Moreover, the twisted configurations of AIE luminogens render them highly sensitive to subtle alterations in interactions within aggregates, thereby providing a valuable tool for investigating the influence of aggregation on molecular structure and properties.[37] However, research of aggregate science is still in its infancy, which needs more effort to be devoted.

In this perspective, we summarize the tip of the iceberg of research development of aggregates and aim to identify methodologies that will guide further research and development of aggregate science. As shown in Figure 2, three types of influences, including activation, transformation, and emergence, will be discussed. In the first section, we discuss the category of activation, which refers to the aggregation induces the recovery of molecular properties that are not shown in isolated molecules. In other words, aggregation activates (or wakes up) the dormant molecular species (from A0 to A1), elucidating the occurrence of specific A property from 0 to 1. In this regard, the most effective molecular structure that plays a crucial role in property A will be stabilized by aggregation. Also of note, the aggregation-recovered property still originates from the molecule itself. In the second section, we summarize cases of transformation, wherein aggregation changes the molecular structure, molecular arrangement, and intermolecular interaction, thus influencing the structure, behavior, and morphology of aggregates. The behaviors of the molecular components (A) shift to B in the aggregate state, where “A” and “B” represent the different properties before and after aggregation, respectively. The third section explores the concept of emergence, where the properties are not present at the molecular level but appear after aggregation (from 0 to 1). The emergent structures and properties that arise after aggregation are distinct from those found in their components (molecules or ions). Finally, in the conclusion and outlook section, various potential applications of aggregate science, including photoelectric materials, X-ray scintillators, and pharmaceuticals are examined. An outlook is also provided on the scope of aggregate systems, which includes molecular aggregates, ionic aggregates, and hybrid aggregates. We hope this perspective will provide some enlightenment and assist the development of aggregate science.

## 2. Activation
Activation refers to the process by which aggregation activates (or “wakes up”) dormant molecular species (from A0 to A1). Concretely, certain molecules have specific properties that are not observed in the dilute solutions state due to the active molecular motion. However, when these molecules aggregate, the most favorable molecular conformation for emission is stabilized, resulting in the activation of dormant luminogens.[38–42] This phenomenon is exemplified by the archetypal AIEgen, tetraphenylethylene (TPE), which falls into the category of activated luminogens.[43,44]

Under room temperature (RT), TPE is nearly non-emissive in dilute THF solution but displays doughty blue emission in the crystalline state. The solution could also exhibit similar blue luminescence as the crystal when cooling to a cryogenic temperature (77 K). Theoretical simulations reveal that excited-state isomerization in the solution accelerates the rapid nonradiative transition. In contrast, in the crystalline state, the abundant intermolecular interactions (such as C–H···π) suppress molecular motion, thereby activating the blue emission via the intramolecular through-space interaction between two vicinal phenyl rings.

Analogously, no measurable emission could be observed in the dilute solution of a typical restriction of intramolecular vibration-typed AIEgen, cyclooctatetrathiophene (CoTh).[45] But noticeable green luminescence recovers after freezing the molecule, which is also similar to the property in its crystalline state. The activation process can be monitored using circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy due to the stereoisomeric properties of CoTh. At RT, the CD signals of the two enantiomers in THF solutions gradually decreased upon irradiation, indicative of the active vibration of CoTh molecules. Conversely, no change in the CD signals is observed in the solid state, suggesting that aggregation effectively suppresses molecular vibration. Theoretical simulations elucidate the mechanism, in which through-space conjugation within the crystal is stabilized by intermolecular interactions, allowing for the activation of green emission.

These observations indicate that the luminescence of TPE and CoTh is indeed activated by aggregation, and the emission of their aggregates originates directly from the molecules themselves. The internal mechanism of this phenomenon can be further explained as follows: at RT, the active molecular motion in dilute solution disrupts the homoconjugations between adjacent aromatic rings, facilitating the nonradiative decay and preventing the formation of an effective conjugation for emission. As a result, the molecule remains dormant. Oppositely, aggregation stabilizes the homoconjugations, leading to the recovery of emission.[46] The activation of luminescence in AIEgens, achieved by suppressing molecular motion, provides a powerful tool for visualizing dynamic processes in materials science and biological systems.[47–49]

## 3. Transformation
Transformation denotes that aggregation changes the behaviors of the molecular components (from A to B). Transformation occurs when aggregation induces changes in molecular components, such as the conformation, arrangement, and intermolecular interactions of the individual parts, ultimately influencing the structure, morphology, and behavior of the aggregates.[50–52]

For example, Zhao and coworkers reported a molecule of BISX that emits weak orange light in a dilute THF solution at RT.[53] With the addition of water, aggregates formed, and the emission intensity gradually increased, suggesting its typical AIE property. To investigate the AIE mechanism, PL spectra in a dilute solution under a cryogenic temperature (77 K) are measured. In contrast to the green emission of aggregate, only short emission peaks at 433 and 460 nm appeared. Theoretical calculations reveal that the upper and lower rings are perpendicular to each other in solution, resulting in nearly non-overlapped HOMO and LUMO electrons. While aggregation changes the conformation, allowing more effective HOMO and LUMO overlap and effective electrons transition. Such a phenomenon could be attributed to the dependence of homoconjugation formation in diphenylmethane with an appropriate dihedral angle.[54–56] Effective homoconjugation exists when the angle between two aromatic rings is twisted and the p-orbitals overlap. In solution, the upper and lower rings are perpendicular to each other (θ = 90°), resulting in a disappearance of the homoconjugation as the p-orbital is hard to overlap. Once the crystal is formed, aggregation decreases the dihedral angle (θ = 84°), enabling effective p-orbital overlap and homoconjugation. The rings as a whole emit bright green luminescence.

Aggregation affects not only luminescence but also influences other properties.[57] Polymorphism, with multiple packing modes, morphologies, and properties, is one of the commonly observed phenomena in aggregate state and serves as a suitable platform to investigate the transformation in aggregate science.[58–60] The BNA molecule can form two types of crystals: microwire and microplate.[61] Besides the disparate morphology, the two crystals also exhibit different photoresponse under UV irradiation. In the BNA-α crystal, the double bonds of two adjacent molecules exhibit a face-to-face overlap with a short distance, resulting in an olefin–olefin cycloaddition reaction under UV light. Due to the symmetrical volume expansion of the photocyclization product (adduct-α), the crystal of BNA-α can bent to 90° along the direction of UV irradiation. Unlike BNA-α, the double bond in the BNA-β crystal exhibits a face-to-face overlap with the phenyl ring of the adjacent molecules, thus bringing about an unusual olefin–aromatic ring cycloaddition reaction. Because the volume of adduct-β expands asymmetrically, cracking occurs in the BNA-β crystal to relieve strain. In this polymorphism case, owing to the different packing modes, the crystals of BNA-α and BNA-β exhibit diverse photocyclization products with discrepant volumes, finally influencing the properties of aggregates. The unique structures and properties make BNA-α and BNA-β excellent candidates for molecular machine and photoprotection.

In addition to changing molecular structures and packing modes, aggregation could transform molecular hydrophilicity into aggregate hydrophobicity (from A to B). For example, a polarity-sensitive AIEgen (TVPV) displays gradually blue-shifted emission corresponding to the decreased polarity of the polymer matrix.[62] Meanwhile, during the hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transformation of chitosan, TVPV initially exhibits a weak and red emission color in the aqueous environment due to the twisted intramolecular charge transfer effect. Upon gelation, the inner environment of chitosan changes from high-polar hydrophilicity to less-polar hydrophobicity, resulting in a blue-shifted and intensified luminescence of TVPV. This phenomenon indicates TVPV serves as an appropriate probe to detect the transformation from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity.

Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is a typical temperature-sensitive polymer.[63] The temperature-resulting phase transition of PNIPAM is a kind of transformation from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity caused by aggregation. At 20 °C, TVPA-incorporated PNIPAM exhibits a weak deep-red emission; after elevating the temperature to 60 °C, the PL spectrum is blue-shifted and enhanced. At RT, because the side chains could form a hydrogen-bond with water molecules, PNIPAM disperses well in water. Once above the lower critical solution temperature, the swelling PNIPAM will collapse to form insoluble aggregates. This occurs because the temperature increase resulted in dehydration, which disrupts the intermolecular hydrogen bonds between water molecules and PNIPAM chains and enabled the formation of a large number of intramolecular hydrogen bonds among PNIPAM chains, causing the insoluble H-bonded aggregates. Besides, there are more extensive aggregation-induced hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transformation in complex biological systems, such as the hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity change before and after protein folding. Understanding the underlying mechanism is of significance for investigating the occurrence, advancing, and therapy of various diseases in the biological field.[64]

## 4. Emergence
Emergence refers to the phenomenon whereby aggregation brings about emergent properties absent at the molecular level (from 0 to 1). Apart from activating dormant molecular species and changing parts’ structures to endow the whole with new properties, aggregation also could generate emergent properties the molecules lacked. Clusteroluminescence describes the luminescence phenomenon of molecules without through-bond π-conjugation.[65] Usually, no emission could be observed for these clusteroluminogens in dilute solution due to the absence of conjugated chromophore, while their aggregates could exhibit bright luminescence covering the full spectrum.[66–69]

For example, L-lysine, as reported by Yuan, is totally non-emissive in a dilute solution (0.08 mM) either at RT or low temperature (Figure 7A).[70] However, bright sky-blue luminescence appears at aggregate state or at high concentration (100 mM). The reason for the emergence of clusteroluminescence by aggregation could be distinctly elucidated by the crystal structure. There are multiple inter/intramolecular through-space interactions (like N–H···O═C, C–H···O═C, H–C···O═C, C–H···π(C═O), and C–H···π(C═O)) within the crystal. These multifarious weak interactions are conducive to rigidifying the crystal structures. Meanwhile, clusteroluminogen (CLgen) is generated by the multiple inter/intramolecular n–n electron interactions (C–N···O═C and C═O···O═C), n–π (C═O···π(C═O)), and π–π (π(C═O)···π(C═O)), thereby realizing clusteroluminescence. The excitation-dependent luminescence implies the new structures are emergent in an aggregate state.

Besides the small molecule of amino acid, clusteroluminescence also extensively exists in natural polymers.[71–73] Not only the protein (bovine serum albumin (BSA)) polymerized from amino acids but also the cellulose and starch extensively existed in plants, are natural CLgens.[74] No luminescence emits in their dilute solution, but clusteroluminescence emerges after aggregation. Clusteroluminescence subverts the traditional perception that luminescence necessitates extended π-conjugation structure, thereby generating a new mechanism in the aggregate state.

Compared with natural polymers, synthetic ones with the merits of easily modified structures, abundant functions, and excellent performances, have greatly promoted the development of human civilization.[75,76] Clusteroluminescence is also frequently observed in synthetic polymers. For example, polyacrylonitrile (PAN), extensively used in clothes, is non-emissive in dilute solution (0.1 mM) either at RT or 77 K, but shows bright luminescence in high concentration (500 mM).[77] The emergent clusteroluminescence is ascribed to the formed CLgens through the n–n, n–π, and π–π interactions among cyano groups. Actually, clusteroluminescence is commonly existed in most synthetic polymers that are free of extended through-bond π-conjugation but contain lone pair electrons. Typical synthetic polymers include polyether, polyamide, polyester, polycarbonate, polymonothiocarbonate, and polyanhydride. All of them feature the character of clusteroluminescence in the aggregate state.[78–81]

In addition to organic systems, emergence also widely exists in organic–inorganic hybrid and inorganic substances.[82–87] TPPGPA represents an organogold complex whose PL spectra can’t be measured both at 293 and 77 K in dilute solution (10−5 M), indicative of its non-luminescent nature at the molecular level.[88] However, the luminescence of TPPGPA is intensified with increasing concentration at 77 K, on account of the gradual formation of clusters. The crystal of TPPGPA exhibits bright white clusteroluminescence after crystallization. Analysis of the crystal structure of TPPGPA manifest that through-space aurophilic Au···Au interaction is formed in the organogold cluster and thus new structure is brought about by aggregation. Notably, the Au···Au interaction is disrupted upon dissolution in solution, and the organogold cluster returns to a dispersed state, indicating its unique reversible feature.

Inorganic substances have more abundant types but little research about their clusteroluminescence property has been carried out yet.[89] Unlike organic molecules, many inorganic compounds couldn’t be expressed by definite molecular structures, namely their components are not molecules. For example, no PL signal is detected from the dilute solution of PbBr2 in DMSO at both RT and 77 K, demonstrating the non-emissive nature of isolated ions of Pb2+ and Br−.[90] Interestingly, as the concentration increases at RT, the PbBr2 dispersion in DMSO exhibits gradually increased luminescence. This arises from the emergent interactions between the ions of Pb2+ and Br−. Furthermore, the ionic salt crystal grown from the DMSO solution exhibits a red-shifted clusteroluminescence color, on account of the formation of a 1D polymer chain of (PbBr2)n in the crystal structure, which extends the electron delocalization. In short, regardless of whether they are organic, organic–inorganic hybrid, or inorganic matters, emergence from 0 to 1 extensively exists. Simple extrapolation from the totally non-emissive molecules or ions, or research from a “reductionism” approach, couldn’t understand the emergent properties in aggregate. Owing to the emergent new structures, the aggregate’s properties are totally different from the individual parts.

## 5. Conclusions and Outlook
The single molecule and its associated epistemology are essential elements in the field of physical science. However, they do not encompass all aspects, and the properties of aggregates are influenced only partially by the molecular components. Adopting a holistic perspective, the relationship between the overall structure and properties of a system should be examined not only at the molecular level but also at the aggregate level. Three possible influences of aggregation on substance properties (activation, transformation, and emergence) have been discussed above, but note worthily more types may also exist.

Many typical AIEgens, such as TPE and Coth, fall into the activation type. They are dormant in dilute solution because active molecular motion disrupts the homoconjugations and prevents the formation of an effective conjugation for emission. Aggregation stabilizes the homoconjugations, resulting in the recovery of luminescence. In some new AIEgen like BISX, the transformation of molecular structure induced by aggregation accounts for the AIE property. Apart from altering molecular structures and packing models, aggregation can also transform the property from molecular hydrophilicity to aggregate hydrophobicity. Emergence extensively exists in inorganic natural products and synthetic polymers, ranging from amino acids and proteins to various plastics. Their molecular species is totally non-emissive even at a cryogenic temperature but bright luminescence emerges in the aggregate state. Besides, emergence is gradually noticed in organic–inorganic hybrid and inorganic substances, such as organometallic complex and PbBr2. The exploration of such substances is in its early stage and they are unexplored treasuries that will be full of newly emergent structures and properties.

The exploration of the aggregation effect on molecular structure and property endows aggregate science with great application potential for the scenario in which materials work in an aggregate state.[91–93] By regulating the packing behaviors, the different structures and properties could be realized at the aggregate level with the same molecule, allowing for applications in various scenarios. For example, Fu et al. reported a molecule β-acetylnaphthalene chelate (βCBF2) which could form J- aggregation (green crystal) and H-aggregation (red crystal) via adjusting the conformations and packing arrangements.[92] J-aggregation reduces the energy gap between the singlet and triplet states for ultrafast reverse intersystem crossing (RISC), exhibiting thermally activated delayed fluorescence property. While the intersystem crossing (ISC) is accelerated in H-aggregation, contributing to realize RT phosphorescence (RTP). This case supports that aggregation enables the rational regulation of molecular excited-state properties, allowing for multiple applications like organic light-emitting diodes and high-contrast bioimaging.[94,95]

X-ray scintillators could convert high-energy X-rays into low-energy visible light, exhibiting a wide range of potential applications in medical radiography, security inspection, space exploration, etc. The acquirement of high-performance scintillating aggregate materials thus is crucial for radiography and radiation detection. Huang and coworkers developed a molecule 10-(pyrimidine-2-yl)-10H-phenothiazine (MN), demonstrating that the phosphorescent scintillation performance could be effectively optimized by controlling the packing structures and intermolecular interactions in aggregate state.[93] The crystals (MN-T) with stronger intermolecular π···π interactions achieved a low detection limit of 278 nGy s−1. Meanwhile, high-performance X-ray radiography of the encapsulated metallic spring and the black plastic box containing the metal sheet also can be realized, indicative of the significance of interplays within aggregates on X-ray scintillator performance. Aggregate science also assists in the improvement of pharmaceutical effect by the synergistic effect of multicomponents within the aggregates.[96] For example, Cai et al. employed theophylline (Thp) to cocrystallize with two flavonoid compounds apigenin (Agn) and daidzein (Dai). Compared with the parent flavonoids, Agn/Thp and Dai/Thp cocrystals exhibit better solubilities, intrinsic dissolution rates, and permeabilities, demonstrating the synergistic effect in aggregate provides a new viewpoint to study the pharmacological action.[97]

Aggregate science emphasizes a holistic approach to exploring the structures–properties relationship of substances, which can offer new perspectives for researchers in related fields. For instance, when materials researchers explore the structure–property relationship at the single molecule level, attention should also be paid to the influences of various intermolecular interactions (such as type, quantity, and strength) on aggregate properties. To regulate the materials’ properties, it is essential not only to design and synthesize molecules with different chemical structures but also to explore and develop effective modulation techniques for multiple interactions to achieve performance adjustment and optimization. Besides, by means of the influence of aggregation on molecular structure and property, new application directions like the highly sensitive turn-on biological probes,[98] the chirality transfer and amplification,[99] and the screening of perovskite additives,[90] can be expanded.

The types of aggregates also vary and are versatile according to the constituted components. For example, organic aggregates could be aggregates formed by single molecular species or two-component molecular aggregates (cocrystal).[100] On the other hand, the category of aggregates is not only limited to organic systems but also includes inorganic systems and organic–inorganic hybrids.[101] The totally non-luminescent ions formed ionic aggregates, such as γ-CsPbBr3 and MtnPt(CN)4 (Mt = Ba, n = 1; K, n = 2), could exhibit bright emission.[85,102,103] When the parts are non-emissive molecules and ions (like TPE4TA and Ag+), PL turns on in the formed organic–inorganic hybrid aggregate (like TPE4TA-Ag+).[104–106] Therefore, these aggregates could be single components, two components, or more components; they can also be homogeneous or heterogeneous.[107–109] Additionally, the new properties of aggregates may include not only luminescence but also chirality, reactivity, photothermy, and more.[110–116] Guided by holism, new models, hypotheses, mechanisms, and knowledge will be generated, contributing to the understanding of macroscopic substances and natural processes. The establishment of new fundamental principles and laws will enable the reasonable design of functional aggregate systems and the advisable exploration of advanced materials.