# Lab-in-Cell: A Covalent Photosensitizer Reverses Hypoxia and Evokes Ferroptosis and Pyroptosis for Enhanced Anti-Tumor Immunity

## Abstract
Photodynamic immunotherapy presents a non-invasive strategy characterized by spatiotemporal control and minimal side effects to induce immunogenic cell death (ICD). This approach significantly enhances the release of tumor-associated antigens and damage-associated molecular patterns, thereby improving cancer immunotherapy outcomes. However, hypoxia and antioxidant defenses at tumor sites considerably diminish the efficacy of photodynamic immunotherapy. In this work, a covalent warhead, alkynamide, is introduced into an AIE photosensitizer to develop a novel covalent photosensitizer, MBTP-PA, which targets redox systems and facilitates ferroptosis- and pyroptosis-mediated photodynamic immunotherapy by thiol-yne click reactions. The covalent photosensitizer interacts with intracellular thiol compounds such as cysteine and glutathione, disrupting the intracellular antioxidant system and alleviating hypoxia. This results in enhanced photodynamic therapy (PDT) efficacy compared to the non-covalent photosensitizer MBTP-A. Furthermore, in conjunction with PDT, this reaction therapy can activate ICD through ferroptosis and pyroptosis, thereby enhancing anti-tumor immunity. Notably, in vivo injection of MBTP-PA nanoparticles at the tumor site led to the elimination of primary tumors, inhibiting distant tumors and exhibiting minimal side effects. Therefore, this work not only integrates the thiol-yne click reactions into cellular systems, significantly enhancing the efficacy of photodynamic immunotherapy but also paves the way for developing novel photosensitizers.

## 1. Introduction
Cancer immunotherapy is a rapidly evolving field that harnesses the patient’s immune system to combat malignant tumors, [1–5] offering innovative strategies alongside traditional therapies such as surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.[6,7] A critical step in tumor immunotherapy is achieving efficient immunogenic cell death (ICD).[8,9] During ICD, the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), including calreticulin (CRT) and high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), promotes the maturation of dendritic cells (DCs) and T cell differentiation, activates the immune response, and initiates adaptive antitumor immunity.[10,11] Recently, evidence increasingly suggests that an immune response is elicited following photodynamic therapy (PDT), highlighting its potential as an immunogenic treatment approach. [12–14]

PDT is a non-invasive treatment that offers spatiotemporal control by utilizing photosensitizers to produce singlet oxygen (1O2) through energy transfer (Type II) or other reactive oxygen species (ROS) via electron transfer (Type I) when exposed to light, effectively destroying tumor tissue.[15–21] During PDT, cells undergo the process of ICD, releasing DAMPs, and activating the systemic adaptive immune response.[22–24] However, the immune effects elicited by PDT-induced ICD are influenced by several factors, which can lead to suboptimal outcomes in immunotherapy.[9,25] PDT should be combined with immune checkpoint blockade reagents to achieve a better anti-tumor immune effect. [26,27] The primary factors affecting efficacy include: 1) the limited residence time of photosensitizers in tumor cells, resulting in insufficient enrichment;[28] 2) hypoxia and the tumor’s antioxidant system, which diminish the effectiveness of PDT;[29,30] and 3) the tendency of PDT to induce apoptosis, which is not conducive to the release of DAMPs. [14] Therefore, to achieve highly effective anti-tumor immunity, it is crucial to develop long-lasting photosensitizers that can alleviate tumor hypoxia and antioxidant system while effectively inducing ICD.

To enhance the efficacy of PDT, strategies such as designing Type I photosensitizers and developing oxygen-carrying methods to increase tumor oxygen levels have been explored.[31–35] However, simply boosting the oxidative capacity of PDT is inadequate, as robust antioxidant responses in tumor cells can significantly diminish its effectiveness.[36] Malignant tumors that survive these responses may develop tolerance to PDT. [37] Therefore, it is essential to develop photosensitizers that specifically target redox systems to improve PDT efficacy. Inorganic chemistry, activated alkyne and thiol click reactions have been developed and successfully applied in polymer synthesis, 3D printing, and bioconjugation, owing to their mild reaction conditions, specificity, and high efficiency.[38–40] Thiol compounds such as cysteine (Cys) and glutathione (GSH), play a critical role as intracellular antioxidants in maintaining redox balance. [41] By incorporating an activated alkyne into photosensitizers as a covalent warhead, a click reaction can occur between the alkyne and thiol groups within cells. This reaction consumes reducing substances and enhances the oxidation state, thereby significantly improving the effectiveness of PDT. Additionally, this click reaction could stimulate immune responses and prolong the residence time of the photosensitizer at the lesion site, resulting in more effective PDT-mediated immunotherapy.

Aggregation-induced emission (AIE) photosensitizers exhibit superior ROS production efficiency in aggregated states compared to traditional photosensitizers.[42–47] To leverage this advantage, we incorporated the covalent warhead alkynamide into an AIE photosensitizer, developing an endoplasmic reticulum-targeting covalent photosensitizer MBTP-PA, aimed at alleviating hypoxia and evoking ferroptosis- and pyroptosis-mediated immunotherapy. Alkynamide reacts with thiol compounds such as Cys, GSH, and proteins, forming covalent bonding with intracellular substances and extending the retention time of the photosensitizer. This intracellular reaction not only alleviates hypoxia but also induces oxidative stress in cells, resulting in improved PDT efficacy. In addition, following reaction therapy and PDT, ferroptosis and pyroptosis are induced, leading to the release of a series of inflammatory factors and DMAPs. These factors stimulate the maturation and antigen-presenting ability of DCs and activate the T cells-dependent adaptive immune response. This systemic anti-tumor immunity effect effectively destroys primary tumors and effectively inhibits distant tumors. Therefore, this work not only develops a covalent AIE photosensitizer to alleviate hypoxia and promote ferroptosis- and pyroptosis-mediated immunotherapy but also provides a framework for discovering new materials to enhance anti-tumor responses.

### 1.1. Photophysical Properties
MBTP-PA with alkynamide was synthesized by reacting MBTP-A with propargylic acid in the presence of 4-Dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP) and 1-(3-Dimethylaminopropyl)-3-ethylcarbodiimide (EDC). Its structure was confirmed using 13C NMR, 1H NMR, and high-resolution mass spectrometry (Figures S1–S3, Supporting Information). The photophysical properties of MBTP-PA were initially examined. The UV–vis spectra revealed an absorption peak (λabs) at 463 nm in a dilute DMSO solution (Figure 1B). As depicted in photoluminescence (PL) spectra (Figure 1C), the emission peaks of MBTP-PA in solid film and DMSO solution were 652 and 666 nm, respectively. Furthermore, the AIE effect of MBTP-PA in DMSO/H2O mixtures was investigated because MBTP-PA is soluble in DMSO but not in H2O. As shown in Figure 1D,E, increasing the water fraction (fw) in DMSO significantly enhanced the fluorescence of MBTP-PA. When fw increased from 40% to 50%, the PL intensity increased sharply, demonstrating AIE characteristics. However, the PL intensity of MBTP-PA decreased when fw exceeded 80%.

To better understand the PL changes of MBTP-PA aggregates, we measured the particle size of MBTP-PA at varying water contents. The results indicated that the average particle size at 50.36 nm (fw = 80%) was smaller than that at 224.6 nm (fw = 50%). The smaller particle size indicates that the effective aggregation of MBTP-PA was reduced, and the surface area was increased, resulting in decreased PL intensity. In addition, the absolute fluorescence quantum yield (ΦF) of MBTP-PA ranged from 0.4% in DMSO to 6.8% in solid film, explaining its AIE properties (Table S1, Supporting Information). Notably, due to its strong donor-acceptor structure, MBTP-PA exhibits pronounced solvatochromism in solvents of varying polarity, including hexane, 1,4-dioxane, ethyl acetate, and DMSO (Figure S4, Supporting Information). To further investigate this donor-acceptor structure, MBTP-PA was analyzed using density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The geometries of MBTP-PA were optimized using the M062x/6-31G** level (Figure 1F). The delocalized electron density of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) was primarily concentrated in the dimethoxytriphenylamine segment. In contrast, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) was concentrated on the benzo[1,2,5]thiadiazole unit, demonstrating strong intramolecular charge transfer in MBTP-PA. Furthermore, the energy level distribution between singlet (S) and triplet (T) states was calculated (Figure 1G). The calculated values of ΔES1-T1 and ΔES1-T2 were 0.75 and −0.13 eV, respectively, indicating that MBTP-PA is prone to trigger the intersystem crossing process. These findings suggest that MBTP-PA is capable of producing reactive oxygen species (ROS).

### 1.2. Exploration of Thiol-Yne Click Reaction of MBTP-PA with Thiol Compounds
After investigating its photophysical properties, we examined the reactions of MBTP-PA with amino acids, peptides, and proteins that have amino, hydroxyl, and thiol groups. MBTP-PA and different amino acids were added into a mixture of PBS and THF (v/v = 1:1) with a pH 7.4, we found that L-lysine and L-arginine (which contain amino group), as well as L-serine, and L-tyrosine (which contain hydroxyl group), did not react with MBTP-PA (Figure 2A,B). In contrast, Boc-Cys-OMe, Cys, and GSH, which contain thiol groups, reacted efficiently with MBTP-PA (Figure 2C; Figures S5–S8, Supporting Information). These results demonstrate that MBTP-PA possesses high selectivity in its reaction with thiol substances. Furthermore, bovine serum albumin (BSA) was chosen as a model protein to verify the potential reaction with MBTP-PA, given that BSA contains one non-oxidized cysteine (Cys-34). In this context, MBTP-PA was reacted with BSA in a PBS solution containing 1% DMSO. The resulting MBTP-BSA product was analyzed using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). As anticipated, MBTP-BSA exhibited significant fluorescence under UV radiation, while BSA alone did not emit any fluorescence. Therefore, MBTP-PA can effectively label proteins containing thiol groups without the need for catalysts.

### 1.3. Analysis of ROS Generation Ability and Species
To evaluate changes in ROS generation before and after MBTP-PA interacts with cellular substances, we assessed the ROS generation capacity and analyzed the ROS species of MBTP-PA, MBTP-BSA, MBTP-PA+BSA, MBTP-A, and Chlorin e6 (Ce6). We used 2,7-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH), a commercial indicator that detects various types of ROS, as a reporter for ROS activity. As illustrated in Figures 3A and S9 (Supporting Information), the PL intensity of the DCFH solution containing photosensitizers significantly increased with prolonged white light irradiation time (10 mW cm−2). The rates of PL intensity growth were ranked as follows: MBTP-PA+BSA > MBTP-PA > MBTP-BSA > MBTP-A > Ce6. These findings reveal that MBTP-PA has a greater ROS generation capacity than MBTP-A and Ce6. Notably, the ROS production rate decreased after MBTP-PA reacted with BSA, likely due to the formation of MBTP-BSA.

To identify the type of ROS generated by MBTP-PA, dihydrorhodamine 123 (DHR123) and hydroxyphenyl fluorescein (HPF) were applied as indicators for superoxide radical (O2−•) and hydroxyl radical (HO·), respectively. This approach allowed us to characterize the photosensitizers’ capacity to produce Type I ROS. As shown in Figures 3B and S10 (Supporting Information), the PL intensity of these indicators varied with light irradiation time. The production rate of O2−• followed the order: MBTP-PA+BSA > MBTP-PA > MBTP-BSA > MBTP-A > Ce6, while the production rate of HO· was ranked as follows: MBTP-PA+BSA > Ce6 > MBTP-PA ≈ MBTP-BSA > MBTP-A (Figure 3C; Figure S11, Supporting Information). These results indicate that MBTP-PA exhibits a stronger ability to produce Type I ROS than MBTP-A for both O2−• and HO·, with a notable decrease in the production rate of Type I ROS observed after MBTP-PA reacts with BSA. In addition, 5-tert-butoxycarbonyl5-methyl-1-pyrroline N-oxide (BMPO) was used to capture HO· and O2−• generated by MBTP-PA and MBTP-A under white light (Figure S12, Supporting Information). The characteristic signal of electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) was detected, providing additional confirmation of the Type I ROS generation.

On the other hand, 9,10-anthracenediyl-bis(methylene) dimalonic acid (ABDA) was utilized as a 1O2 indicator to determine whether Type II ROS was generated. As shown in Figures 4D and S13 (Supporting Information), the decomposition rate of ABDA across all groups, except for Ce6, aligned closely with that of the control group, and no significant EPR signal was detected, when the 1O2 was captured using 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine (TEMP) (Figure S14, Supporting Information), indicating that MBTP-PA did not produce 1O2. Collectively, these results affirm that MBTP-PA functions as a Type I photosensitizer.

### 1.4. Fluorescence Imaging and Antitumor Activity Analysis
Following our investigation of the ROS production capacity of MBTP-PA, we further examined its localization and anti-tumor activity within cells. In order to highlight the characteristics of the covalent photosensitizer MBTP-PA, we selected MBTP-A as a control. First, we examined the cellular uptake rates and retention time of both MBTP-PA and MBTP-A. As shown in Figures S15 and S16 (Supporting Information), 4T1 cells were incubated either with MBTP-PA or MBTP-A, and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) was employed to capture images at various time points. By analyzing the mean fluorescence intensity in the cells, we found that the intracellular accumulation of both compounds increased over time, with MBTP-A entering the cells more rapidly than MBTP-PA. After 24 h of incubation, we replaced the medium to observe the change in intracellular fluorescence intensity. As shown in Figure S17 (Supporting Information), MBTP-PA exhibited a longer retention time of intracellular fluorescence compared to MBTP-A, indicating that covalent photosensitizers have superior retention in cells.

To further elucidate the differences in intracellular distribution between MBTP-A and MBTP-PA, we conducted co-localization experiments using commercial organelle biomarkers. The results revealed that Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.87 between MBTP-A and Lyso-Tracker Green, indicating that MBTP-A predominantly localized in lysosomes (Figure 4A). In contrast, MBTP-PA showed a high degree of overlap with ER-Tracker Green, yielding the Pearson’s correlation coefficient of 0.91, compared to lower correlations with Mito-Tracker Green, Lyso-Tracker Green, and Bodipy (Figure 4B).

Subsequently, we evaluated the tumor-killing efficacy of MBTP-PA in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, leveraging its robust ROS generation capacity and chemical reactivity. In the absence of white light irradiation, over 50% of MBTP-PA-stained 4T1 cells were killed at concentrations exceeding 8 μm (Figure 4C). However, MBTP-PA maintained over 80% of cell viability in normal L929 cells at concentrations below 8 μm (Figure S18, Supporting Information). Under white light exposure, the cytotoxic effect of MBTP-PA on 4T1 cells was further signified. Although MBTP-A exhibited an obvious photodynamic antitumor effect, its efficacy was dramatically diminished or rendered ineffective in hypoxia conditions. In contrast, MBTP-PA retained its killing effect (Figure 4D), attributed to its reaction with thiol groups. To confirm these biological reactions occurring in cells, we lysed the MBTP-PA-treated 4T1 cells and performed Western blot analyses. As depicted in Figure 4E, distinct fluorescent protein bands were observed in the MBTP-PA group, but not in the MBTP-A group, indicating that MBTP-PA reacted with intracellular proteins. In addition, we used DCFH-DA to assess the intracellular oxidation levels. In the absence of light, green fluorescence from DCF was detected in the cells treated with MBTP-PA under both normoxia and hypoxia conditions, but MBTP-A did not produce such fluorescence (Figure 4F). The results suggested that MBTP-PA induced intracellular oxidative stress by depleting reductive substances. For the cells incubated by MBTP-PA or MBTP-A illuminated with white light (30 mW cm−2) for 5 min, the green fluorescence signals from DCF were observed in both groups (Figure 4G), indicating that MBTP-A and MBTP-PA generated ROS in cells under white light. The substantial ROS production by MBTP-A and MBTP-PA contributed to the effective killing of tumor cells.

### 1.5. Research on the Mechanism of Cell Death
The reaction of covalent photosensitizers MBTP-PA with thiol compounds induced intracellular oxidative stress. Previous studies have shown that redox imbalance is associated with ferroptosis.[48,49] Therefore, we investigated the ferroptosis triggered by MBTP-PA. GSH is a critical reducing agent that maintains the redox balance in cells. Our analysis revealed that the intracellular GSH levels of MBTP-PA and MBTP-PA+L groups were lower compared to the control group (Figure 5A). This reduction was attributed to the consumption of GSH and the subsequent generation of substantial amounts of ROS under white light. Moreover, we characterized the levels of GPx4 protein and lipid peroxides, which are the key indicators of ferroptosis. Western blot analysis revealed a decrease in GPx4 expression in both MBTP-PA and MBTP-PA+L groups (Figure 5B). Lipid peroxidation assays indicated that the level of malondialdehyde (MDA), a byproduct of oxidation, in the MBTP-PA group was comparable to that of the control group. However, after the cells underwent PDT, the MBTP-PA+L group exhibited significantly elevated MDA levels compared to the other groups (Figure 5C), suggesting that MBTP-PA induces tumor cell death via ferroptosis under white light irradiation. Meanwhile, the anti-tumor activity of MBTP-PA was inhibited in the presence of ferrostatin-1 (Figure 5D), yet it still showed a notable anti-tumor effect. We hypothesized that the antitumor activity of MBTP-PA is not solely dependent on the ferroptosis. Furthermore, we observed that the cells in the MBTP-PA group at a high concentration of 32 μm, as well as those in the MBTP-PA+L group, exhibited foaming behavior (Figure 5E; Figure S19, Supporting Information), suggesting that these cells may be undergoing pyroptosis. [50,51]

To validate our hypothesis, we assessed the factors associated with pyroptosis. The results revealed that inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β and IL-18) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were released in the treatment group (Figure 5F–H). In addition, pyroptosis-related proteins were analyzed. Notably, the levels of GSDMD and pro-caspase-1 were significantly reduced in the MBTP-PA+L group, while the levels of GSDMD-N and cleaved-caspase-1 were increased (Figure 5I). These results indicate that MBTP-PA generates ROS upon light irradiation, which activates caspase-1 within the cells. This activation leads to the cleavage of GSDMD into its active GSDMD-N fragments, which subsequently translocate to the cell membrane, forming pores to induce pyroptosis.

Next, we verified pyroptosis-mediated immunogenic cell death (ICD) by detecting calreticulin (CRT) and HMGB1 biomarkers. As shown in Figure 5J,K, the exposure of CRT in MBTP-PA-stained 4T1 cells significantly increased under light irradiation. Additionally, HMGB1 was found to migrate from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and ATP was significantly released in the treatment group (Figure S20, Supporting Information). These results indicate that MBTP-PA effectively induces the ICD, activating the adaptive immune responses through pyroptosis upon light irradiation.

### 1.6. Preparation and Characterization of MBTP-PA Nanoparticles
To facilitate the in vivo application of MBTP-PA, DSPE-PEG2000 and DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD were utilized to encapsulate MBTP-PA, because they have the advantages of increased drug circulation time, enhanced stability, reduced protein adsorption, and improved encapsulation efficiency.[52] This method forms MBTP-PA nanoparticles (MBTP-PA-NPs) with an average particle size of 110.9 nm and a zeta potential of −33.4 eV (Figure 6A–C). The encapsulation efficiency is 46.7%. The long-term particle size stability test confirmed that MBTP-PA-NPs remain stable for up to 30 days (Figure 6D; Figure S21, Supporting Information). Photophysical characterization demonstrated that MBTP-PA-NPs exhibit an absorption maximum of 472 nm, a maximum emission peak of 650 nm, and an absolute fluorescence quantum yield of 6.4% (Figure S22, Supporting Information). In addition, cellular uptake and fluorescence colocalization imaging showed that MBTP-PA-NPs entered cells more rapidly than MBTP-PA and were predominantly localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (Figures S23 and S24, Supporting Information). Cell viability tests showed that the nanoparticles exhibited higher cytotoxicity toward cancer cells than normal cells (Figure S25, Supporting Information).

### 1.7. Intracellular Distribution and Safety Evaluation of MBTP-PA-NPs In Vivo
To gain a deep understanding of the distribution and metabolism of nanoparticles in vivo, MBTP-PA-NPs (11.67 mg kg−1) were injected into tumor-bearing mice via the tail vein, and their distribution was monitored using fluorescence microscopy. At 24 h post-injection, the fluorescence intensity was notably higher in the liver, lung, and tumor, indicating that the MBTP-PA-NPs primarily accumulated in these organs and tissues. By 48 h, the fluorescence intensity in the liver and lung decreased and increased in the tumor. This suggests that the MBTP-PA-NPs underwent metabolic processing and preferential accumulation at the tumor site. After 72 h, the fluorescence intensity in the liver, lung, and tumor gradually diminished. Furthermore, following the injection of MBTP-PA-NPs (11.67 mg kg−1) into normal mice, we assessed various blood routine indicators and hemolysis rate. As shown in Figure 6G and Figures S26 and S27 (Supporting Information), no significant hemolysis was observed at concentrations below 128 μg mL−1 (the red in the supernatant is the color of the MBTP-PA-NPs itself), and there were no notable differences in fifteen blood indicators compared to the control group. These results indicate that MBTP-PA-NPs exhibit minimal toxicity at these concentrations.

### 1.8. Synergistic Treatment of Primary Tumor and Distant Tumor
After confirming the safety of MBTP-PA-NPs, we applied MBTP-PA-NPs in photodynamic immunotherapy to target and suppress distant tumors in a bilateral 4T1 tumor model. MBTP-PA-NPs (3.5 mg kg−1) were injected into the primary tumor (left side), followed by irradiation with white light (150 mW cm−2) for 30 min after a 24 h incubation period. We then monitored and collected growth data for both primary and distant tumors (right side) in mice. The results showed no significant difference in the weight of mice among all groups. By analyzing the tumor volume and weight, we found that MBTP-PA-NPs significantly inhibited the growth of the primary tumor. Notably, the MBTP-PA-NPs+L group showed even greater anti-tumor activity compared to MBTP-PA-NPs alone, attributed to the synergistic effects of intracellular reactions and PDT. Regarding the distant tumors, their growth was significantly suppressed in the MBTP-PA-NPs+L group, likely due to the immune response elicited by this therapeutic approach.

In addition, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) tumor staining was conducted to assess cell morphology. Notable voids and karyopyknosis were observed in the primary tumors treated with MBTP-PA-NPs and the distant tumors treated with the MBTP-PA-NPs+L group. In the primary tumor of the MBTP-PA-NPs+L group, H&E staining of the adjacent muscle tissues revealed normal histological characteristics. Additionally, H&E staining of key organs in the treatment groups showed no significant damage, demonstrating good biosafety of MBTP-PA-NPs (Figure S28, Supporting Information). Furthermore, the TUNEL staining and Ki67 analysis of the distant tumor revealed that many tumor cell deaths and significantly inhibited cell proliferation in the treatment group, corroborating the findings from the H&E staining.

To investigate the immunological mechanisms underlying pyroptosis-mediated photoimmunotherapy induced by MBTP-PA-NPs, we conducted immunological analyses on the spleen and distant tumors four days post-treatment. Staining of CRT and HMGB1 in distant tumors showed the expression of both markers in the MBTP-PA-NPs and MBTP-PA-NPs+L groups. Subsequently, we analyzed the presence of mature dendritic cells (DCs) and activated immune cells. In the spleen, the proportion of mature DCs (CD86+, CD80+) was found to be 79.01% and 87.98% in MBTP-PA-NPs and MBTP-PA-NPs+L groups, respectively, much higher than those in the control group, indicating that both the reactive activity and the photodynamic effects of MBTP-PA contribute to the maturation of DCs.

To further investigate whether mature DCs can activate different types of T cells (CD4+ and CD8+), we analyzed the levels of these T cell subsets in distant tumors using flow cytometry. The results showed a significant increase in the proportion of effector CD4+ T cells in the MBTP-PA-NPs+L group, while the proportion of CD8+ did not obviously change. These findings indicate that CD4+ T cells play a pivotal role in photodynamic immunotherapy. This inhibitory effect on distal tumors could be attributed to the fact that CD4+ T cells assist CD8+ T cells to inhibit tumor growth, and CD4+ T cells have an inhibiting effect on tumors. [53,54] This suggests that MBTP-PA-NPs-mediated PDT can effectively activate immune responses, highlighting its potential in immunotherapy.

## 2. Conclusion
This study successfully integrates a covalent warhead, alkynamide into an AIE type I photosensitizer, culminating in the development of the novel targeted endoplasmic reticulum covalent photosensitizer, MBTP-PA. It facilitates ferroptosis and pyroptosis, enabling a synergistic approach to photodynamic immunotherapy. It also demonstrates its covalent capability by efficiently reacting with thiol compounds such as Cys, GSH, and BSA. Additionally, it outperforms the non-covalent photosensitizer MBTP-A in terms of cellular retention and the induction of intracellular oxidative stress, which help alleviate tumor hypoxia and enhance the efficacy of photodynamic therapy. More importantly, the MBTP-PA-NPs not only promote ferroptosis and pyroptosis through thiol-yne reaction therapy and photodynamic therapy, but also initiate the ICD. This was validated through anti-tumor experiments in a bilateral 4T1 tumor model, demonstrating the effective elimination of primary tumors and significant suppression of distant tumors. And MBTP-PA-NPs have no apparent damage to normal tissues, showing excellent biosafety. Overall, this research not only introduces a new class of covalent photosensitizers, but also provides a framework for developing advanced therapeutic materials to improve anti-tumor strategies.

## 3. Experimental Section

### Synthesis of MBTP-PA
MBTP-A (0.4 mmol, 212 mg), EDC (0.8 mmol, 124 mg), and DCM (12.0 mL) were placed into a 50 mL round bottom flask. Propiolic acid (0.6 mmol, 42 mg) was then added slowly to the mixture in the ice water bath. Next, the solution of DMAP (0.02 mmol, 2.4 mg) in DCM (8.0 mL) was added dropwise into the above mixture. Then, the temperature was spontaneously warmed to room-temperature and the reaction was stirred for 3 h (the progress of the reaction was monitored by TLC). After completion of the reaction, the reaction was extracted three times with water and DCM. The organic phase was dried with anhydrous sodium sulfate. The DCM was removed under vacuum and the resultant residue was purified by flash chromatography on silica gel to get the red solid MBTP-PA in 55% yield (eluent: DCM). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) δ 7.97 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.81 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 7.76–7.68 (m, 5H), 7.14 (d, J = 12.0 Hz, 4H), 7.06 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 6.87 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H), 3.81 (s, 6H), 2.97 (s, 1H). 13C NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) δ 156.1, 154.1, 153.7, 149.6, 149.0, 140.5, 134.4, 133.2, 129.9, 129.8, 127.1, 126.8, 120.0, 119.6, 114.8, 74.4, 55.5. HRMS (MALDI-TOF) m/z [M + Na]+ calcd for C35H26N4O3SNa+ 605.1618, found 605.1625.

### Intracellular Reaction
4T1 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate at 6 × 10^5 cells per well and incubated for 12 h. The medium was then replaced with fresh DMEM (10% FBS) containing MBTP-A or MBTP-PA (100 μm). After 24 h of incubation with the compounds, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS. The cells were collected, lysed on ice for 15 min using lysis buffer, and centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was collected, boiled, and used for protein electrophoresis. Protein concentration was determined using a BCA reagent. Proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, and the bands were visualized using a UV mode of gel imager. The protein bands were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue, washed with water five times, and imaged with a gel imager.

### Preparation of Nanoparticles
MBTP-PA (1.0 mg), DSPE-PEG2000-cRGD (1.5 mg), and DSPE-PEG2000 (1.5 mg) were dissolved in 1 mL of THF under ultrasonic dispersion. Then the homogeneous mixture was quickly added to ultrapure water (10 mL). After sonication using a probe sonicator for 3 min, the mixture was collected and concentrated by centrifugal filters for further use. The obtained nanoparticles were stored at 4 °C.

### Establishment of 4T1 Tumor Models
The Animal Ethics Committee of the South China Agricultural University granted approval for all animal experiment protocols (approval number: 2023d098). A bilateral tumor mouse model was initiated by subcutaneously injecting 4T1 cells into the left and right hips of mice at −8 and −2 days prior to treatment, respectively, to induce primary and distant tumors.

### In Vivo Biodistribution Evaluation
The mice bearing 4T1 tumors were administered with MBTP-PA-NPs (11.67 mg kg−1) through tail-vein injection (n = 3). After injection for several times (24, 48, 72, and 96 h), these mice were euthanized to extract heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and tumor. Fluorescence imaging of these tissues were conducted using an imaging system.

### In Vivo Therapeutic Efficacy Evaluation
The 4T1 tumor-bearing BALB/c mice were randomly divided into four groups (n = 6). The mice in each group were systemically administrated with PBS or MBTP-PA-NPs (3.5 mg kg−1) through intratumor injection. After administrated for 24 h, the primary tumors of mice were exposed under white light irradiation (150 mW cm−2) for 30 min. After different treatments, the therapeutic efficacies were evaluated by measuring the sizes of both primary and distant tumors every 2 days for 14 days. Tumor volumes (V) were calculated according to the formula: V = (tumor length) × (tumor width)^2 / 2. After 14 days of treatments, the mice in each group were euthanized, and both the primary and distant tumors were extracted to weigh. The wavelength of white light was 400–1000 nm.

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.